With more extreme weather events expected to bring floods and droughts, the body urged world leaders to focus on mitigating the effects of global warming.
LONDON - The British Environment Agency on Wednesday delivered a stark warning to world leaders on the need for decisive action to combat climate change, ahead of a U.N. summit in Glasgow this month when delegates from nearly every country will discuss strategies to tackle global warming.
"It is adapt or die," Emma Howard Boyd, chairwoman of the government agency, said in a report to the British government.
The recommendations follow a summer of extreme weather in Europe, from deadly fires in Greece to violent floods in Belgium and Germany that experts said were fueled by climate change. With Britain and other countries in the region experiencing more frequentdroughts, heat waves and flash floods in recent years, the disasters have driven home the message that a hotter world is affecting wealthier and poorer countries alike and it is only going to get worse.
Lethal floods like those in Germany this summer will happen in Britain sooner or later, no matter how high the country's flood defenses are built, Ms. Boyd cautioned, urging overarching adaptations to homes, communities and workplaces to make them more resilient to increasingly violent weather.
"While mitigation might save the planet, it is adaptation, preparing for climate shocks, that will save millions of lives," she said. The report cautioned that environmental regulation had not yet caught up with the changing climate.
Even if countries manage to meet the target of limiting the average temperature rise to two degrees Celsius compared with preindustrial levels - the goal set in the 2015 Paris Agreement - the report said that winter rainfall was still expected to increase by 6 percent and summer rainfall to decrease by 15 percent in the 2050s compared with the last two decades of the previous millennium.
In Britain, about four million people and some 200 billion pounds, or $272 billion, of assets are at risk from flooding caused by global warming if no action is taken, the report warned.
In some cases, access to clean water will grow more difficult in England. Without further action, demand for public water supplies in England will outstrip supply by the 2050s, the report said, exacerbated by droughts and other effects of climate change.
The environment agency said it was working with the government, businesses and communities to prepare and had invested ?5.2 billion, or about $7 billion, to shore up flood and coastal defenses over the next six years. It said it had also developed a national framework to manage water supply, and established an $870 million environmental restoration fund.
But with the number of properties built in floodplains in England expected to double by 2065, the agency said it alone cannot protect everyone from increasing flood risks. Instead, it called on communities and businesses to invest in finding ways to live with the risks and to minimize potential damage, such as funding "flood resilience" instead of prevention and restoring wildlife and ecosystems.
Experts said the report served as a reminder that more urgent preparations are needed.
"There remains a gap to implementing measures on the ground. We still don't see enough being done," said Lorraine Whitmarsh, professor of environmental psychology at the University of Bath. The inevitability of extreme weather means adaptation measures are just as important as mitigation, she added.
The need for adaptation had already been felt by poorer countries,including some island nations vulnerable to rising sea levels.
Bernard Aryeetey, director of international affairs at WaterAid, an international charity that provides clean water in several countries, said the warning to adapt or die was a reality millions of the world's poorest people have been facing for decades.
"The alarming news that these devastating impacts will reach our shores must be a rallying call to G-20 leaders to deliver the money for adaptation they have been promising for many years," Mr. Aryeetey said, calling on Britain to lead the charge.
Dr. Rick Lupton, a lecturer at the University of Bath who has researched climate change mitigation, said cutting emissions remained a critical priority.
"The faster we can cut emissions now, the more we can avoid the worst climate change events in future," he said.

As the leaders of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund meet this week, they have a chance to reimagine how the world can use finance to reduce the risks from climate change. 
  For the economies working toward the goal of achieving by 2050 a net-zero world -- one where we have removed as much of our carbon emissions as we produce -- a huge obstacle will be mobilizing enough private investment to help developing countries do their part. In the coming decades, emissions from fast-growing emerging markets such as Brazil, India, Indonesia and South Africa are expected to increase at faster rates than those from rich countries like the United States, the members of the European Union and Japan. If this comes to pass, the entire world will be overwhelmed by the effects of climate change.
  Achieving the net-zero transition will require unprecedented levels of investment in technology and infrastructure. Investments in low-carbon projects in poor countries will need to total more than $1 trillion a year -- more than six times the current rate of investment of $150 billion.
  Governments can't finance this scale of investment alone, and emerging markets have struggled to attract private capital. Institutional investors, like pension funds and insurance companies, are wary of putting people's savings into markets where there may be worries about political stability, credit risk and the enforceability of contracts. These types of investors have a duty to act in the best financial interests of their stakeholders. Making emerging markets a viable option for institutional investors will take structural reforms requiring many years -- time the world doesn't have.
  So how do we get the necessary levels of investment in time?
  Rich countries must put more taxpayer money to work in driving the net-zero transition abroad. Their current efforts, while growing, are insufficient -- the current level of emerging-market climate investment includes just $16 billion of grants annually from the governments of developed countries.
  Based on research by my company, BlackRock, stimulating $1 trillion per year of public and private investment to reduce emissions will require closer to $100 billion in grants or subsidies from countries that can afford it, like members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and China. While the figure seems daunting, especially as the world is recovering from the Covid pandemic, a failure to invest now will lead to greater costs later.
  The climate disaster will not respect national borders. Without global action, every nation will bear enormous costs from a warming planet, including damage from more frequent natural disasters and supply-chain failures. Investing $100 billion in public funds annually over the next 20 years would prevent costs of at least 10 times that amount -- the likely consequence if we fail to meet the 2050 target for net zero.
  An essential part of raising the scale of capital necessary to transition emerging market economies to net zero will be using public finance to raise more private capital. Government funding in the form of grants and subsidies can absorb some of the risks that come with investing in emerging economies. They can make climate projects a viable option for institutional investors.
  Today, the amount of private capital raised for every grant or subsidy is dismal. The World Bank and other multilateral development banks estimate that for every dollar of public capital they have lent, they attract, on average, less than a dollar of private finance. By sharing some of the risks that deter private investors from investing at all, government finance can help make emerging markets a realistic proposition for private investors.
  Multilateral institutions like the I.M.F. and the World Bank are often criticized for being too slow to adapt when faced with crises. One alternative is to design new financial institutions to deploy capital to fight climate change.
  But I believe it is possible to reinvent the existing multilateral development banks, multilateral agencies and climate funds so that they can channel grants and subsidies from developed countries more effectively. We need to leverage the local knowledge of these institutions and invest in solutions like green banks that can take this capital and blend it with international public and private finance.
  My hope is that the leaders now meeting in Washington are willing to be bold and push international bodies to overhaul their approach to climate finance for poor countries. Time is running out.

When I left Canada for the United States in 1987, I had never seen or heard a red-bellied woodpecker, which at that time was a rare vagrant in southern Ontario. Today, they are firmly established here, and I have encountered several since returning to Canada in 2018.
It’s no mystery why red-bellied woodpeckers are advancing northward. They’re responding to a warming planet. To which one might say: “Fine, good for them!” But in an interconnected world, where the fate of one species is inextricably linked to the fortune of another, rapid changes always carry consequences. At a time when the climate change discourse is focused mainly on its causes, its effects on weather and our so-far tepid efforts to address the problem, it’s good to see a book on how animals and plants are responding and faring amid the flux.
Starving polar bears forced to swim as ice melts have become an evocative symbol of global warming. But as Thor Hanson reveals in “Hurricane Lizards and Plastic Squid,” there are subtler, less noticed dramas playing out.
Take, for example, the so-called escalator to extinction, a phenomenon as sad as it is insidious. Temperature and moisture patterns change with elevation, as do the species who inhabit each terrain. On a heating planet, those animals and plants that have adapted to particular elevations are being forced to higher ground, until they reach the top and, having nowhere left to go, perish. Studies have documented this effect on birds, moths and tree seedlings, and it seems likely that other life forms, including mammals, reptiles and amphibians, are vulnerable to this upslope migration toward oblivion. With 25 percent to 85 percent of the world’s species now in the process of relocating, one wonders whether the hottest regions on earth will become barren lands, devoid of any life, like the “dead zone” in the Gulf of Mexico, which covers somewhere around 7,000 square miles.
Despite the gravity of its subject, though, this is not a depressing book. An award-winning biologist and author whose earlier work has focused on bees, feathers, seeds and gorillas, Hanson is an affable guide and storyteller, with a knack for analogy, a sense of humor and the natural curiosity of a scientist. In a compact chemistry lesson using a jar of pickles and a lit match, he and his son, Noah, perform an experiment to demonstrate the power of carbon dioxide. On another occasion, he takes his hatchet to a dead pine in his yard to try to discover whether his tree is being attacked by destructive borer beetles.
Elsewhere, Hanson outlines carbon dioxide’s omnipresence, its gradual subterranean conversion to fossil fuels (petroleum, coal, natural gas) and its much faster release into ecosystems when we burn those fuels. In the oceans, acidification corrodes and weakens the protective shells of tiny mollusks vital to marine food ecosystems, and sparks sensory confusion for fishes that rely on water chemistry for finding mates, meals, homes and avoiding predators. When coral reefs decline, this reduces not just food, but cover for reef denizens.
In this deteriorating world, it takes some evolutionary agility for a species to avoid losing its grip on life, sometimes literally. An experiment with anole lizards demonstrates rapid natural selection favoring feet and toes better able to hold onto twigs and branches during severe storms. The diminutive reptiles cling to a stick while being subjected to close-range blasts from a leaf blower. I don’t imagine the anoles appreciated being subjected to near-hurricane-force winds (never mind the noise!), but I was pleased to see that they were all returned to the wild reportedly unharmed.
If improving your grip isn’t on your to-do list, perhaps changing your wardrobe is. In Finland, the once-rare brown tawny owl is now overtaking the more typical gray one, owing to declining snow cover. I was reminded of when, as a young child, my father explained to me how the pepper moths in London, which rely on camouflage to elude hungry birds, underwent a similar transformation from white to dark gray when the Industrial Revolution plastered buildings and trees with soot.
One of the core lessons here is that our climate emergency affects not just individual species but, inevitably, interspecies relationships. Witness the effects of changing climate on the interdependence of plants and birds. Consider the “timing mismatches” that occur with flowering plants. Nectar-rich flowers are hitting their peak blooming phase a week or more before hummingbirds arrive. Insect activity is also affected, with flocks of hungry swallows missing an expected insect hatch. It is only by careful population monitoring that we are likely to notice these shifts, such are the creeping effects of climate change.
Temperature, of course, isn’t the only climatic variable at play: Some trees are moving south and west in pursuit of drifting moisture. Blue jays and other seed-caching birds facilitate the migration by carrying and burying seeds over long distances, some of which inevitably go unretrieved when a jay forgets or dies.
But how, Hanson wonders, does a plant outrun climate change when its prime seed distributor has gone? Joshua trees lost their most important long-distance seed disperser in the giant Shasta ground sloth, whose kind went extinct following the last ice age, probably because of human predation. Whereas the lumbering sloths could excrete Joshua seeds miles from where the fruits were eaten, today the Joshuas are left with pack rats and other small mammals, whose dispersal services amount to a measly six feet per year. (I’m hoping that history’s most prodigious seed disperser, humankind, is atoning for past misdemeanors.)
Although there are plenty of species declines in these pages, there are also stories of flexibility and resilience. Nimble dovekies (a.k.a. “little auks”), small, plump arctic seabirds, are not only so far surviving, but also thriving, no longer having to fly as far to find their favored food — flourishing zooplankton made accessible by melting ice.
There were occasions when I was hoping for information that didn’t materialize. It’s fascinating to learn that elderberries have a more bear-friendly nutritional profile than salmon, and that Alaskan grizzly bears will abandon the salmon run to feast on these berries, which are now fruiting earlier. But I’d like to know how they sense when the time is right. Can they smell the berries from a distance, or perhaps see a blush of purple appearing on bushes upslope?
The grizzlies aren’t the only ones after salmon. The author declares a passion for fishing. In doing so, he joins a sizable cadre of self-described animal-loving writers who nevertheless pursue a pastime that causes fear, pain and suffering in their quarry. There is now robust science demonstrating pain and emotion in all kinds of fishes, salmon included. The dissonance here is not just ethical but ecological. As Hanson explains, the native cutthroat trout he seeks is threatened by hybridization with rainbow trout, with which these streams have been stocked to serve the recreational demands of anglers.
Which brings us to Hanson’s inspirational closing argument, that individual action drives much-needed policy change, not vice versa. While nobody can do everything, there is much that each of us can do (and not do), “tangible things like how we drive, shop, eat, travel, protest, vote,” and even, he writes, “cut the grass.” Amen.
Jonathan Balcombe is a biologist and the author of “Super Fly” and “What a Fish Knows.”

The town and village of Potsdam have achieved bronze-level status in the state's Climate Smart Communities program.
In order to be certified, a community must establish a climate change task force that includes residents and municipal representatives, which then addresses a list of possible climate-smart actions that can be taken.
Planning and Development Director Frederick J. Hanss said that in order to reach bronze status, a community needs 120 "points" racked up through various climate-positive actions.
"Back in 2017, the village set up a Climate Smart Communities Task Force which has worked on a number of activities designed to reduce the village's carbon footprint and greenhouse gas emissions," Mr. Hanss said.
He said the village conducted a survey making note of greenhouse gas emissions for village operations, such as from the civic center, the Department of Public Works, and the Pine Street Arena.
Mr. Hanss said the study came up with areas where the village could conserve electricity, so last year, LED street lighting was installed to do just that, which also helped generate points to reach bronze status.
Although Mr. Hanss said the status is largely honorific, it does allow the village and town to apply for certain grants to help with future climate-positive projects.
"We were really pleased to get selected as a bronze-level community," he said. "It's a public recognition of the fact that the community has worked hard to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and our carbon footprint."
Mr. Hanss made clear that Potsdam is not finished doing whatever it can to curb climate change.
"We continue to move along and push the ball forward," he said.
Right now, he said, he's working on an application through the Climate Smart Communities program to get zero-emission vehicle charging stations. He's also working with Clarkson University on a compost program to deal with food waste generated at the universities and local grocery stores, and to hopefully donate some of that waste for local farmers to use as compost.
Mr. Hanss recognized the efforts of volunteers who worked on Potsdam's Climate Smart Communities Task Force.
"It's staffed by volunteers from the community, and we appreciate all the time they put in and the work they do," he said. "It's remarkable."

This May - 20 months after Hurricane Dorian unleashed its cruelty upon my Bahamas - I looked down from an airplane's window and could see land that was still visibly wounded. Grand Bahama and the Abacos were once covered in dark green foliage that complemented the emerald waters; now long stretches had faded to brown, even gray. Two-story waves had blown apart wide sections of shoreline. Once-gorgeous mangrove swamps - habitat for algae and crabs and bonefish, and the land's defense against a storm's surge - were overwhelmed by Dorian's salt water, and large swaths of them lay dead, their brittle shells shimmering in the heat. The same fate befell the abundant indigenous Caribbean pine trees, which take decades to grow to their towering heights of over 100 feet. They need fresh water to survive, so when the ocean stretched upon the land and sat there for days, it killed acres of them.
Interspersed between the dead mangroves and fields of mangled bark I would find still-marred neighborhoods. Concrete toppled. Roofs missing. Debris scattered. Some blocks looked akin to the aftermath of rapture: Those taken were not taken gently, and those granted enough mercy to survive had stories so harrowing they approached the point of legend. One man was flung high into a massive gum tree and remained there until rescue arrived. Another man and his son, almost swept away by the flood, managed to hang on to the trunk of a pine. By the end of the storm, they had no skin left on their arms.
Standing in her yard, her battered home behind us, Jacana Theoc told me how she and her six children endured three terrifying days inside the storm. The sky above was calm, with fading pink clouds, as she described how they spent nearly 12 hours standing atop their countertops while the living room and kitchen filled with water. At one point, nearly neck-deep in it, her oldest son said, "Mummy, I can't feel my legs." As she remembered, she paused to look up at the darkening sky, the stars just becoming visible, and wiped away a few tears.
Somehow, she said, they escaped. Somehow - after retreating into the attic, after struggling over a barbed-wire fence, after a bout with snakes in their search for dry land - she and her family were, by some miracle, still alive. But their house was gutted. The water inside climbed to the ceiling, destroying everything they owned. Very slowly, she and her husband have begun repairs. But "the reason it's taking so long," she told me, "is because we're literally doing this out of pocket." 
Every time I have returned home to the Bahamas since the storm, I've also stopped by what remains of my uncle's house. My mother was living there when Dorian began to worsen off the coast. Having been through many hurricanes, she decided to shelter in place. But her sisters had awful premonitions of danger and begged her to come to Nassau. Eventually she relented and, for the first time in her life, retreated from a hurricane. She turned out to be incredibly lucky: Dorian intensified rapidly just before landfall, and the house was thoroughly ransacked. Its windows and doors were blasted open, and much of what had been on the inside was in pieces on the outside. The roof survived, but the refrigerator was dangling among the support beams, having floated up into the ceiling and never descended. If my mother had remained there, we might never have found her.
Before my mother, before Bahamians, before the colonizers and the enslaved people they dragged here, it was in large part the Indigenous Ta?no who cultivated the lands. They believed hurricanes arrived because of the powers of the zemis, or divine deities. The Ta?no feared and respected these zemis, whose powers often devastated Ta?no communities. To survive, they sheltered in sturdy structures when storms came, praying to be spared. European colonizers, before killing nearly all the Ta?no, took note of these strategies - knowledge passed down across the time of colonization that serves as a basis for Bahamians today.
But even with that knowledge, Dorian far surpassed anything we Bahamians thought a hurricane could be capable of. Tyrone Mather, a 54-year-old I met as he tried to repair his house, seems to have internalized this difference with his own body. He told me that he went to the shoreline as Dorian's lightning flashed off the coast. He put his palms in the water and felt that it was warm, and so he fled his home. Like most Bahamians, he has lived a life of surviving storms, and now he knows by touch what climate scientists have come to agree on: Warmer oceans mean stronger hurricanes.
Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University, once said that the question with any given hurricane is not "Was it caused by climate change?" but rather "How much worse did climate change make it?" Hurricanes are seen as the Earth's mechanism for ferrying excess heat from the Equator toward the poles. With the average surface temperature of the planet's oceans having increased nearly one degree Celsius since the preindustrial era, there is now more heat in the tropics, and so the planet's transfer of that heat has become more powerful; the storms quicker to intensify and the lives of those in their paths more precarious. Even small increases in hurricane strength can have catastrophic effects. According to the United States National Weather Service, doubling wind speed from 75 to 150 miles per hour can equate to 256 times more damage potential. And while the strongest hurricanes in the Bahamas' history once topped out at 160-mile-per-hour sustained wind speeds, Dorian's was 185 - a difference that, per the same scale, means more than three times the damage power. For Bahamians, only a handful of miles per hour seem to span the difference between tearing down power lines and tearing up concrete.
The consequences are immense. The damage Dorian inflicted on the Bahamas was estimated at $3.4 billion - about one-fourth of the country's 2019 gross domestic product, and almost six times the damage of Hurricane Matthew in 2016, formerly the costliest storm the country had faced in the past 30 years. Historically, hurricanes kill very few people in the Bahamas, but Dorian officially killed nearly 100, and hundreds more remain missing.
The Ta?no believed that hurricanes were the consequences of choices made by beings outside their control. Today it's the intensifying strength of the hurricanes that is outside the control of Bahamians. It is the consequence of decisions made by wealthy nations beyond our shores, and the greenhouse gas emissions that have fueled their prosperity and way of life. Most of these gases have come from the United States, China, the European Union, Russia and other developed countries. Compared with them, the Bahamas' own emissions are tiny. And yet it is the Bahamas, along with other small islands worldwide - like Antigua and Barbuda, the Maldives, Kiribati and the Marshall Islands - that are on the front lines of the climate crisis.
Given the long-known imbalance between those most culpable for climate change and those set to suffer most from it, the question of who should be held accountable for losses and damages is not a new one. It has been asked for three decades, and is even addressed in the Paris Agreement. The accord is thought to have three pillars. The first, "Mitigation," mandates that countries commit to doing what they can to keep the rise in global average temperature well below two degrees Celsius. The second, "Adaptation," concerns the preparation of infrastructure and communities to survive changes in the climate. "Loss and Damage" is third. It seeks to build support for joint financing, commensurate with different economies' contributions to climate change, to address all the destruction of resources, homes, ecosystems and livelihoods that Mitigation and Adaptation cannot prevent.
The concept of Loss and Damage was first introduced by Vanuatu, a member of the Alliance of Small Island States (A.O.S.I.S.), as part of a 1991 proposal for a pool to compensate victims of sea-level rise. It didn't prove especially consequential, though, until 2013, when a coalition of island states and developing countries pushed to bring attention to it during the United Nations' annual climate conference. Just days before the conference began, the Philippines, long familiar with tropical cyclones, was devastated by Typhoon Haiyan, which killed more than 6,000 people and displaced millions. Yeb Sa?o, a delegate for the Philippines, addressed the conference and swore to a hunger strike until meaningful negotiations took place. "What my country is going through as a result of this extreme climate event is madness," he said. "The climate crisis is madness." And with this, for a moment, the divide between the rooms in which climate policy was negotiated and the climates those policies implicated became inescapably thin. Despite relentless pushback from developed countries, a landmark decision was made to award Loss and Damage its own mechanism in future negotiations.
At the 2015 conference in Paris, debate around Loss and Damage rose to a fever pitch. Developed countries, by and large, wanted to fold Loss and Damage mechanisms into the articles in the agreement regarding Adaptation, arguing that the two were coupled. Many developing countries believed they should be separate; some were already experiencing losses from climate change, and it seemed clear that even with profound adaptation, such injuries were now inevitable. "We mobilized very big-time, the climate-vulnerable forum countries, the least developed countries," Saleemul Huq, the director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development in Bangladesh, told me. "It became one of the make-or-break issues that took us into overtime on the last day in Paris."
Toward the end of the conference, John Kerry, representing the Obama administration, met with Enele Sopoaga, who was then the chairman of A.O.S.I.S. and the prime minister of Tuvalu, a chain of low-lying Pacific islands. Throughout the conference, Sopoaga stressed his commitment to seeing A.O.S.I.S.'s goals included in the agreement, saying, "Nobody is going to take them out now without a war." But in an interview after their meeting, Kerry told reporters that "I explained exactly where we're coming from on that, and I think there's good understanding." The United States Congress, according to Kerry, would be rigidly against any implication of any nation's liability for climate damages elsewhere. And so, when the landmark Paris Agreement was successfully adopted at the end of the conference,Loss and Damage did win recognition as a stand-alone article in the agreement - but while the accords included the aim to "enhance understanding, action and support" for such damages, a caveat was added, explaining that the agreement "does not involve or provide a basis for any liability or compensation."
After Dorian, a torrent of international aid began pouring into the Bahamas. To help manage recovery efforts, the government established a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, Management and Reconstruction - and, within that, the Disaster Reconstruction Authority. Over the 20 months since the storm, tens of millions of dollars have been spent on the islands' recovery from the worst disaster in their history. Fourteen schools have been repaired and more than three million cubic yards of debris cleared; funds have been delivered for small businesses and payments worth thousands awarded for homes in need of repair.
"We're pretty pleased about the Small Home Repair Program," Katherine B. Smith, the managing director of the D.R.A., told me. The organization had helped about 2,600 people, and had another thousand approved and waiting. But, Smith said, there was still some way to go. Around 9,000 homes sustained damage during Dorian, and considerable debris still remains - all while the pandemic has paralyzed tourism, the Bahamas' most significant economic driver, and tied up the government's resources. When I asked Smith how much longer recovery efforts might take, given that we're approaching two years since the storm, she said the answer was "a minimum of another two to three years. And that's based on all things being good."
Jacana Theoc and her family were left with only the shell of their home. "We figured we had more damage than anybody," she told me. But when the government assessed what was left of their property and offered assistance, the family didn't get as much as they expected. The Red Cross helped with food for a while, and social services provided some furniture and a few new appliances, but the house Theoc spent 10 years saving for remains boarded up and battered. The story was similar everywhere I went. In the High Rock area, where residents were still trying to rebuild, a woman with a measuring tape on her belt told me that while her community had lost many people in the storm, it had even more deaths in the aftermath. And Nadine Pinder, whose husband is pastor of the Emmanuel Baptist Church, told me many seniors in her community were in special need of help: "Some of them have lost their families. And the one thing you know you felt so secure in, which is your home, has now been taken away."
Many residents had whole houses swallowed by the storm and were left with only foundations. For temporary shelter, the Bahamian government contracted for more than 100 white, igloo-like domes made of a fiberglass composite, part of a $6.4 million family relief package. I'm told the domes leak, and have a tendency to get too warm and accumulate mold. A woman who lives in one (she asked to be referred to only as Zelma, worried about sounding ungrateful or jeopardizing future aid) told me she had been trying to rebuild her home with climate adaptation in mind. She's using concrete this time, instead of wood, despite the expense. Other than funding from the D.R.A. and previous help from the Red Cross, her family has to stretch her daughter's small salary to cover construction. They heard that an NGO, Samaritan's Purse, was still around, offering free roofs. "We've been working on it, trying to get the house up to the belt course" - the juncture at the top of a story - "so we could get that roof," she told me. "But it hasn't worked out." She shook her head for a while, holding it low. "And hurricane season is right here again."
Similarly, Ann Wilmore now lives in a government dome built atop the foundation where her house once was, on a vibrant bluff overlooking the Sea of Abaco. She looked to NGOs for help rebuilding, but many left the islands when the pandemic arrived. Most of those who remained told her they'd depleted their resources, and for what they had left - windows, roofs, doors - "they told me I don't qualify because I lost the whole structure." When she went to the D.R.A., she was told they weren't taking new applications. (Smith, the program's managing director, told me earlier that the D.R.A. was looking to raise funds and partnerships to expand the Small Home Repairs Program, but until then its portal was scheduled to remain closed.) I watched Wilmore's eyes dart around her remaining foundation, the different tiles indicating what were once different rooms, and I could tell she was imagining the home that had stood there. When she threw open her hands, I could see the sea behind her. "What do you mean I don't qualify?" she said.
In the 1940s, a scientist named Irving Langmuir hypothesized that he could weaken a hurricane by flying crystals of dry ice into its eye wall. None of his results were reproducible by others. About a decade later, though, two terrible hurricanes made landfall in the United States, together inflicting damages upward of $1 billion - and the federal government became interested in Langmuir's experiments, believing that controlling the storms, or at least weakening them, could prove worthwhile. The effort, authorized by Congress, was called Project Stormfury, and it continued until 1983. Every action the project thought might be successful at weakening hurricanes has since been proved false or inconclusive. But over the same period, of course, the country was indeed changing the nature of hurricanes: As the world's No. 1 greenhouse gas emitter, it helped raise the planet's average temperature. The United States may have failed at weakening hurricanes, but it has extensively contributed to making them more powerful.
Since the Paris Agreement, as the effects of climate change have worsened, the U.S. stance on Loss and Damage has remained the same. "Loss and Damage is an existential issue for us," said an A.O.S.I.S. representative, the Belizean environment minister Omar Figueroa, at the most recent climate-change conference in 2019. "We need clear and predictable finance that we can access to really compensate for the loss and damage that so many of our sister nations are feeling." U.S. representatives, however, operating under the Trump administration, continued to refuse discussions of finance, and privately underscored that doing otherwise would "push the button of a certain man in the Oval Office."
As a proposed workaround, some developed countries, like those of the European Union, have suggested tapping the Green Climate Fund, a pool made available for developing countries to help in their mitigation and adaptation efforts. But Harjeet Singh, a senior adviser at Climate Action Network International, told me this would deplete an already underfunded stream. "Loss and damage occurs when you realize you have not done enough on mitigation and adaptation," he says. Finance, he says, remains a paramount issue. According to some economists, losses and damages from climate change are set to amount to somewhere between $290 billion and $580 billion a year by 2030. Currently there is no finance stream to meet those costs. "That means that money that should have gone to education, health care, infrastructure is now being diverted to emergency response and rehabilitation and reconstruction, which puts developing countries into a vicious cycle of poverty and debt," Singh says. "Finance is something that really rich countries, particularly the U.S., have made sure that there is no progress and not even discussion on."
On April 22, 2021, the Biden  administration began a Leaders Summit on Climate - part of an attempt, after the Trump administration, to rescue the narrative of the United States' role in combating climate change. In his opening address,the president urged nations around the world to increase their ambition to curb emissions. Vice President Kamala Harris spoke about climate justice, and Secretary of State Antony Blinken noted that while every country was feeling the effects of climate change, "some countries are experiencing much more severe impacts than others, something we must acknowledge and address." But they made no mention of developed countries rising to the call of accountability; they made no mention of Loss and Damage.
On behalf of my Bahamas, I wish I could say that the world wasn't so inextricably connected. It would mean that as the planet continued to warm, Bahamians like my mother, like Jacana Theoc, Tyrone Mather and Ann Wilmore, would not be at such risk of having their entire lives lacerated. In a closed system, the carbon emissions from a small island state might change the climate at a rate proportional to their size. But the systems of this world are bewilderingly open, tangled across oceans and continents and nation-states, and so the cumulative carbon footprint of every country on the planet is coming to bear down on small islands. Some of us are disappearing as the oceans rise. Some are experiencing droughts. Some are facing storms that are swinging blades we can no longer parry. My Bahamas are facing effects of climate change that we could never have caused ourselves, and crises larger than we can survive alone.
I am told that global climate conferences tend to take place at convention centers, in windowless rooms with strip lighting and air-conditioning. This means that global climate policies are negotiated in climates far more neutral than the ones they affect. But their stakes remain incredibly high. Because this year's conference, in November in Glasgow, will be the Biden administration's first, it has an excellent chance to raise its ambitions and finally allow a discussion about accountability to developing nations and small island states. There's no other way to achieve climate justice, and no other way our countries can survive.
Bernard Ferguson is a Bahamian poet and essayist currently working on a book about climate change and small island states. Melissa Alcena is a Bahamian portrait and documentary photographer based in Nassau. Her work focuses on shifting the paradise narrative of the Caribbean.

LONDON — England will be hit hard by floods like those that devastated Germany this summer if the country does not improve its defense against more extreme weather brought by climate change, a governmental agency said Wednesday.
In a report, the Environment Agency warned of hotter, drier summers, more and worse flooding, rising sea levels and greater demand on water supplies due to global warming.
It predicted that even with a rise of 2 degrees Celsius in global average temperature -- below the level of warming that has been projected -- England’s winter rainfall will increase 6%, but summer rainfall will be down 15% by the 2050s.
The report also warned that London’s sea level is expected to rise by between 23 centimeters and 29 centimeters (9 to 11 inches) by the 2050s, and around 45 centimeters by the 2080s.
Emma Howard Boyd, the agency’s chair, said that “significant climate impacts are inevitable” and it is a case of “adapt or die.”
“We can successfully tackle the climate emergency if we do the right things, but we are running out of time to implement effective adaptation measures,” she said.
“Adaptation action needs to be integral to government, businesses and communities too and people will soon question why it isn’t — especially when it is much cheaper to invest early in climate resilience than to live with the costs of inaction," she added.
The U.K. is hosting the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow next month, and officials are set to highlight the importance of helping communities adapt to climate change. But Howard Boyd said the issue is still in danger of being neglected.
The warnings come in the Environment Agency’s third adaptation report, which was submitted to the government under the Climate Change Act.

The world has made progress in the fight against climate change, with wind, solar and other clean technologies taking off. But more is needed to avert catastrophe, a new report finds.
WASHINGTON -- Clean energy technologies such as wind turbines, solar panels and electric vehicles are advancing so rapidly that the global use of fossil fuels is now expected to peak by the mid-2020s and then start declining, the world's leading energy agency said Tuesday. 
  But there's a catch: The transition away from coal, oil and natural gas still isn't happening fast enough to avoid dangerous levels of global warming, the agency said, at least not unless governments take much stronger action to reduce their planet-warming carbon dioxide emissions over the next few years.
  The International Energy Agency's annual World Energy Outlook, a 386-page report that forecasts global energy trends to 2050, comes just weeks before world leaders gather for a major United Nations climate summit in Glasgow to discuss how to accelerate the shift away from fossil fuels and prevent the planet from overheating.
  ''The world has made a remarkable amount of progress on clean energy over the past decade,'' Fatih Birol, the agency's executive director, said in an interview. ''But there's still so much more that needs to happen.''
  The new report finds that the world has made significant strides in the fight against climate change. Wind and solar power are now the cheapest source of new electricity in most markets and growing briskly. Sales of electric vehicles worldwide hit records last year. Across the globe, approvals for new coal-fired power plants, a major source of emissions, have slowed dramatically in recent years, as governments and banks have increasingly refused to finance them.
  Governments are also stepping up their policies to curb emissions. The European Union has been increasing the price it charges large polluters to emit carbon dioxide. India has ratcheted up efficiency standards for new air-conditioners. China has said it would stop financing new coal plants overseas.
  As a result, the International Energy Agency now projects that humanity's emissions of carbon dioxide will reach a peak by the mid-2020s and then drop slowly in the decades thereafter. Global coal use is expected to fall between now and 2050, despite an uptick this year driven by increased industrial activity in China, while global oil demand is expected to enter into permanent decline by the 2030s, as people switch to electricity to fuel their cars.
  That alone would be a remarkable shift. Ever since World War II, global carbon dioxide emissions have been on a seemingly inexorable upward trajectory, with only temporary dips during recessions, as the world relied on ever greater quantities of fossil fuels to power homes, cars and factories. A turning point is now in sight, the report says.
  Even so, this shift is still nowhere near enough to avert some of the most perilous consequences of climate change, the agency warned.
  Current energy policies will still put the world on track to heat up roughly 2.6 degrees Celsius (4.7 degrees Fahrenheit) by 2100 compared to preindustrial levels, the report found. Last month, the United Nations warned that such an outcome would be ''catastrophic,'' noting that countries are already suffering much higher risks of deadly heat waves, droughts, floods and wildfires after just 1.1 degrees Celsius of global warming to date.
  Many world leaders hope to limit average global warming to around 1.5 degrees Celsius to avoid some of the most dire and irreversible risks from climate change, such as widespread crop failures or ecosystem collapse.
  To meet that goal, it won't be enough for global emissions to simply peak and then decline gently in the decades ahead, as they are currently on track to do, the International Energy Agency said. Instead, the world's nations would have to move much faster to slash emissions nearly in half this decade and stop adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere altogether by around 2050.
  Earlier this year, the agency laid out a detailed road map for what such an effort might look like. By 2030, for instance, electric vehicles would have to make up more than half of new car sales globally, up from just 5 percent today. By 2035, wealthy countries would have to shut down virtually all fossil-fuel power plants in favor of cleaner technologies like wind, solar or nuclear power. By 2040, all of the world's remaining coal plants would have to be retired or retrofitted with technology to capture and bury their carbon emissions.
  Nations would need to triple their investment in clean energy over the next decade, to roughly $4 trillion per year, the agency said. Most of that increased spending would need to flow to developing countries, which have been responsible for the bulk of emissions growth in recent years but have often struggled to gain access to financing.
  ''So far only about 20 percent of clean energy investments are going to emerging countries,'' said Mr. Birol. ''That needs to change. This is a race that no one wins unless everyone finishes the race.''
  The report noted that many countries are contemplating more forceful action, at least on paper. More than 50 countries, including China and the United States as well as the European Union, have now announced targets to get to ''net zero'' -- that is, to reach the point where they are no longer adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere -- over the next few decades.
  If every country followed through on that promise, the world could potentially limit total global warming to around 2.1 degrees Celsius by 2100, the report found. But even this outcome is far from assured, since most of the nations pledging to go net zero have not yet enacted policies to achieve those goals.
  The new report also warns that the transition to a cleaner energy economy could prove bumpy without careful planning. Over the past six years, global investment in new oil and natural gas development has sagged, particularly in the wake of the pandemic. But if the world doesn't invest heavily enough in clean energy alternatives to replace those sources, many countries could find themselves in an energy crunch, as Europe is currently experiencing this fall.
  ''This needs to happen quickly,'' the report said, ''or global energy markets will face a turbulent and volatile period ahead.''

“We’ve heard directly from a growing number of our advertising and publisher partners who have expressed concerns about ads that run alongside or promote inaccurate claims about climate change,” the company said.
Google said it will no longer display advertisements on YouTube videos and other content that promote inaccurate claims about climate change.
The decision, by the company’s ads team, means that it will no longer permit websites or YouTube creators to earn advertising money via Google for content that “contradicts well-established scientific consensus around the existence and causes of climate change.” And it will not allow ads that promote such views from appearing.
“In recent years, we’ve heard directly from a growing number of our advertising and publisher partners who have expressed concerns about ads that run alongside or promote inaccurate claims about climate change,” the company said.
The policy applies to content that refers to climate change as a hoax or a scam, denies the long-term trend that the climate is warming, or denies that greenhouse gas emissions or human activity is contributing to climate change.
Google limits or restricts advertising alongside certain sensitive topics or events, such as firearms-related videos or content about a tragic event. This is the first time Google has added climate change denial to the list.
Facebook, Google’s main rival for digital advertising dollars, does not have an explicit policy outlawing advertisements denying climate change.
In addition to not wanting to be associated with climate change misinformation, ad agencies, in an echo of their shift away from the tobacco business decades earlier, have begun to re-evaluate their association with fossil-fuel clients. Agencies such as Forsman &amp; Bodenfors have signed pledges to no longer work for oil and gas producers. Calls have increased to ban the industry from advertising on city streets and sponsoring sports teams.
Greenpeace USA and other environmental groups filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission earlier this year accusing Chevron of “consistently misrepresenting its image to appear climate-friendly and racial justice-oriented, while its business operations overwhelmingly rely on climate-polluting fossil fuels.” Exxon faces lawsuits from Democratic officials in several states accusing it of using ads, among other methods, to deceive consumers about climate change.
Publications such as the British Medical Journal, The Guardian and the Swedish publications Dagens Nyheter and Dagens ETC have limited or stopped accepting fossil fuel ads. The New York Times prevents oil and gas companies from sponsoring its climate newsletter, its climate summit or its podcast “The Daily,” but it allows the industry to advertise elsewhere.

Hotter, faster, stronger: That isn't a tagline for the next blockbuster superhero movie. This is what climate change is doing to many extreme weather events. As the planet warms, heat waves are getting hotter, wildfires are moving faster and burning larger areas, and storms and floods are becoming stronger. 
  These effects are no longer a future or distant concern: They are affecting us -- all of us -- here and now. The last week of July, in Ontario, where one of us, Dr. Hayhoe, was visiting family, the sun was orange and hazy, and smoke from the wildfires that blazed across Canada hung in the air. The week before, Dr. Otto anxiously checked in with family in Rhineland-Palatinate, the region in western Germany where heavy rainfall caused floods that took more than 150 lives.
  We're both climate scientists, so when a disaster happens, we're often asked: Is this climate change or just bad weather?
  While it is a natural human inclination to want to categorize things in simple terms, how climate change affects our weather is not an either/or question. We are already living in a world that is two degrees Fahrenheit warmer than it was at the outset of the Industrial Revolution. That means that every weather event is already superimposed over the background of a changed climate.
  The more precise question to ask is this: Did climate change alter the severity, frequency or duration of this event? Increasingly, the answer is a resounding yes. And thanks to cutting-edge science, we're starting to be able to put some numbers on it, too. This type of research is called attribution.
  How can science tease out the exact contribution of human-caused climate change to a given event without a separate, otherwise identical but human-free earth to compare it to? The first step is to characterize the event using observations: how long and hot the heat wave was or how much rain fell during the storm or how strong the hurricane was.
  Then we turn to our climate models. These are sophisticated physics-based simulations of the atmosphere, ocean and land surface that are run on supercomputers. Because we know very well the amount of greenhouse gases humans have added to the atmosphere, we can remove the human influence from climate models' atmospheres to create a world without climate change. Using the models, we can then identify how strong, how long, how big and how likely the same event would be in that imaginary world.
  The effect of climate change is the difference between what happens in a world without human influence and what happened in the real world. When scientists find that, say, what is now a once in 100 years event in the real world would have occurred only once every 200 years without climate change, this doubled risk can be attributed to climate change.
  Attribution matters because our human brains prioritize immediacy. We are wired to feel more concerned about a small leak in our roof than we are about a rise of a few degrees in ocean temperature 50 or 500 miles away. But when your home is in Houston, an increase of a few degrees in ocean surface temperature turns a distant problem into an immediate catastrophe, as when rain from a storm like Hurricane Harvey deluges your home for days upon days.
  That storm hit Houston in August 2017. It wasn't until December of that year, though, that the first attribution study was published showing that climate change made a storm with as much rainfall as Hurricane Harvey three times as likely. It took until 2020 for scientists to calculate that three-quarters of the tens of billions of dollars in economic damage suffered during the storm stemmed from the additional rainfall attributed to human-caused climate change. This is a stunning number, but by then, the news cycle had long since moved on.
  This is why new rapid attribution analyses are so important. Take the heat wave this summer in the Pacific Northwest and British Columbia, which resulted in estimated hundreds of heat-related deaths, ruined crops and wildfire outbreaks. The town of Lytton, British Columbia, broke the temperature record for Canada three days in a row. On the fourth day, Lytton was all but destroyed by wildfire. These events were so extreme that they were very difficult to imagine, even for climate scientists like us, just two months ago.
  Dr. Otto was part of an international team of researchers organized by the World Weather Attribution initiative who conducted a rapid analysis of the event. They found that human-induced global warming made the heat wave 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit hotter and at least 150 times as likely to occur. The report garnered headlines in part because it was released just nine days after the heat wave occurred, so it was still news.
  The attribution team is working on its next report, analyzing the heavy rain and flooding in Germany and Belgium in July. We won't have exact numbers until the analysis is completed this month, but we do know from basic physics that in a warmer atmosphere, the chance of heavy rainfall is higher. A just-published report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has shown this very clearly.
  As extreme weather increasingly becomes the new norm, this is how rapid analysis and attribution science can help us more clearly and succinctly label and calculate the ways climate change multiplies the threat of extreme weather and puts us all at risk. But we don't need to analyze any more events to know we need to act, and quickly.
  The evidence and the data are already clear: The faster we cut our emissions, the better off we'll all be.
  Katharine Hayhoe is a professor at Texas Tech University and the author of the forthcoming book ''Saving Us: A Climate Scientist's Case for Hope and Healing in a Divided World.'' Friederike Otto is a climate scientist at the University of Oxford and the author of ''Angry Weather: Heat Waves, Floods, Storms, and the New Science of Climate Change.''

Farmer has a manure solution for fighting climate change
With about 800 dairy cows dropping tons of manure each day, visitors to Reinford Farms here in Juniata County would expect to be walloped by certain barnyard scents.
On a recent breezy autumn afternoon, though, only a hint of Holstein wafted through the air. That's on account of the methane digester downhill from the barns. It resembles a covered swimming pool, 18 feet deep, filled with cow manure. Methane, the gas produced by that manure, is pumped out to heat and electrify the barns, the milking carousel, and even the farmhouse where Brett Reinford's parents live. There's so much manure, making so much methane, that Reinford sends electricity back to the grid.
"We make enough electricity here to power a hundred houses," said Brett Reinford, a partner in the farm his father started.
The farm, just miles from the Juniata River and the Chesapeake Bay watershed, is at the forefront of fighting climate change in Pennsylvania, but conservation groups said the state is lagging behind.
"Not only is it behind, it is the laggard," said Will Baker, president of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation. "All the other states are at least making progress."
Last month, Gov. Tom Wolf called on the U.S. Department of Agriculture to implement a $737 million Chesapeake Bay Resilient Farms Initiative. That money would help Pennsylvania farmers reduce nitrogen and improve water quality for the watershed, which includes the Susquehanna River.
"Pennsylvania agriculture has stepped up to the challenge and has a plan," Wolf said. "Farmers are waiting to jump into action."
According to Pennsylvania's Department of Agriculture, there were 52,700 farms covering 7.3 million acres in Pennsylvania in 2019. The average size of those farms is 139 acres, smaller than the 444-acre average, nationwide. While the state, one of six in the Chesapeake watershed, has been called out by conservationists, there has been progress, said Shannon Powers, a spokesperson for the Department of Agriculture. Conservation grants are available, as well as Farm Vitality grants that can help families with business plans and transfer of ownership.
At Reinford's farm, the two methane digesters cost about $4 million. Reinford said half of those expenses were covered by grants from the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Commonwealth Financing Authority. The family initially sought out the methane digester to control odor.
"My dad wanted to be a good neighbor," he said.
Surprisingly, the methane digesters sparked a whole new business for the Reinfords, the reason why cans of expired cat food, ravioli, and produce are delivered there almost daily. Local businesses, including major supermarket chains, are eager to recycle materials and dispose of food waste, ethically, and inside ametal barn on the farm, Reinford has constructed a "depackager" that separates the food from its packaging. The food gets pumped into the methane digester with the cow manure and the materials are recycled. They can depackage anything not in glass.
"Basically, these companies want to send as little as possible to the landfill, and we help them do it," he said.
Reinford said the liquids from the methane digester are used as fertilizer while dry, refined manure is used as bedding for the dairy cows.
"The goal is to be zero waste," he said.
Although there are relatively few methane digesters on Pennsylvania farms, Reinford said plenty of farmers have come to check them out. That type of farmer-to-farmer education is key to making progress against climate change and poor water quality, Powers said.
"There will always be some resistance to change," Powers said. "For example, there's been a push to plant buffers along creeks, and farmers often resist that because they believe the buffer takes away income. They want as much field as possible."
Dairy and beef cattle have often taken the brunt of the blame for agriculture's role in climate change. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that 25% of the methane in the United States comes from cows in the form of burps and farts. The biggest source of methane comes from oil and gas systems. Dave Smith, executive director of the Pennsylvania Dairymen's Association, said dairy farmers have a lot of opportunity to help combat climate change. If there's resistance, Smith said, the market often demands the changes.
"It's happening already," Smith said. "Our end users are driving better practices."
Smith pointed to research being done with cow feed at the University of California-Davis that claims to reduce methane from burps by 82%. The answer, university researchers found, is seaweed.
"The seaweed inhibits an enzyme in the cow's digestive system that contributes to methane production," the researchers wrote in March.
One group in Pennsylvania is also trying to change plowing, one of farming's oldest customs, a practice done by generations for hundreds of years. The Pennsylvania No-Till Alliance says farmers don't need to plow at all, encouraging them to plant "cover crops" that stay in the fields through fall and winter.
"The basic philosophy is that you want living roots in the ground all season," said Jay Howes, an administrator with the group. "We ask farmers to put the plows away and not go chopping up the soil and releasing all the carbon into the atmosphere."
Howes said farmers can plant various cover crops, including types of rye and millet, into their corn and soybean fields after harvest. He said that many farmers, particularly in Western Pennsylvania, are still resistant, but that the practice is spreading.
"Farmers listen to other farmers and we have mentoring days where we explain the process," said Howes, a former farmer.
Reinford Farms also plants cover crops when their corn is harvested. Brett Reinford said it's simply another way to make the farm sustainable for future generations. He and his brothers plan to take over when his parents retire. His children see the place as a playland, as he did when he was a child.
"When we talk about sustainability, it's twofold because everything that we do that's good for the environment usually saves us some money in the end," he said. "It makes a lot of sense. We make money and protect the environment."

Come visit the Maldives, its president entreated the world at this year's United Nations General Assembly, moments before switching to an impassioned plea for help combating climate change. The adjacent appeals illustrated a central dilemma for many small island developing states: their livelihoods, or their lives?
The United Nations recognizes 38 member states, scattered across the world's waters, as small island developing states grouped together because they face “unique social, economic and environmental challenges.”
This bloc is particularly vulnerable to climate change. This bloc is also particularly dependent on tourism — a significant driver of climate change, accountable for 8% of global carbon dioxide emissions alone, according to sustainable tourism expert Stefan Gössling — and an industry devastated by the ongoing coronavirus pandemic.
The predicament these islands find themselves in is essentially recursive: Attract tourism for economic survival, which in turn contributes to climate change, which in turn bleaches the colorful reefs and destroys the pristine beaches that attract tourists. As is, by the end of the century, these low-lying islands could drown entirely.
“The difference between 1.5 degrees and 2 degrees is a death sentence for the Maldives,” President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih told the U.N. General Assembly last week.
The annual summit is an opportunity for each of the international body's 193 members to step into the spotlight on the world stage. But the Maldives — perhaps best known globally as an Indian Ocean playground for moneyed honeymooners and Bollywood celebrities — had a particularly high-profile platform this year. Its foreign minister is serving as the General Assembly's president and Solih was speaking third overall — just after U.S. President Joe Biden.
But the climate change appeals are nothing new, made year after year as these islands are pummeled by storms and the seas rise like a “slow-moving killer,” as Colgate University's April Baptiste puts it.
Baptiste, a professor of environmental studies as well as Africana and Latin American studies, researches environmental justice in the Caribbean region. She says the island states' appeals had gone ignored for years because they were essentially seen as “dispensable.” With little land, political power and financial capital, it was easy to overlook their plight. These are also islands with a history of exploitation that dates back centuries and states whose full-time residents — not tourists — are primarily Black and brown.
“You have that layer of race, racism, marginality to take into consideration,” she said. “I absolutely believe that's at the heart of the conversation as to why small island developing states are not taken seriously.”
People and governments have taken matters into their own hands over recent years.
One man from the island nation of Kiribati sought refugee status in New Zealand on the basis that climate change posed an existential threat to his homeland, though he was eventually deported. This past week, Vanuatu announced it would seek to bring climate change before the International Court of Justice. Although largely symbolic — any ruling would not be legally binding — the move, as intended by the government, seeks to clarify international law.
Last month, a group of Pacific island nations — contending with encroaching saltwater that destroys crops and pollutes freshwater supplies — took the step of declaring their traditional sea boundaries would remain intact, even if their coastlines shrank beneath the waves.
Gössling, a professor at Sweden's Linnaeus University School of Business and Economics, and Daniel Scott, a geography and environmental management professor at Canada's University of Waterloo, are two creators of the Climate Change Vulnerability Index for Tourism. With the aim of bringing the issue to policymakers' attention, they identified the countries with tourism economies most at risk from climate change. The small island developing states made up a substantial portion of the list.
“The Maldives identified this years ago and they pointed out: ‘We’re going to continue our tourism development, because that's the only way we can make money in the next couple decades before our islands are lost," Scott said.
For the small island developing states, this central climate change tension between lives and livelihood is mirrored in their response to the coronavirus pandemic. To prevent the virus' spread and save lives, they closed their borders, and their tourism-focused economies were accordingly ravaged over the past 18 months.
Mauritius isn't wholly dependent on tourism, but that sector does make up a significant amount of its foreign revenue, the permanent representative to the United Nations for the tiny Indian Ocean island east of Madagascar says. Its borders fully reopen in October, and Jagdish Koonjul said Mauritius hopes to attract 650,000 tourists between then and next summer.
Mauritius, Koonjul said, is “very lucky” compared to others in the bloc because of its economic diversification, relatively high land and coral reef that prevents erosion.
But it's not safe from climate change. Mauritius and other small island developing states are looking to the bigger, more industrialized countries to buy into an ambitious commitment at the upcoming United Nations climate conference in Glasgow.
“We miss this train now, and we are doomed,” Koonjul said.
The scores of speeches at this year's U.N. General Assembly tended to follow a rubric. They opened with pleasantries directed at the General Assembly's president and then touched on a laundry list of topics: perhaps a pet issue, but definitely conflict, coronavirus and climate change. The rhetoric often blended together, but the speeches from the leaders of the small island developing states — with the most to lose in the near future — stood out with stark eloquence echoing Koonjul.
“Will Tuvalu remain a member state of the U.N. if it is finally submerged? Who will help us?” asked Kausea Natano, the prime minister of the Pacific Ocean country, on Saturday.
The states had specific asks, including immediate and significant reductions of greenhouse gas emissions, debt restructuring and financial assistance — especially given the impact of the coronavirus on their tourism-dependent economies.
“Industrialized countries have an obligation to assist the states most affected by climate change because they created a problem in the first instance,” Gaston Browne, prime minister of the Caribbean Sea's Antigua and Barbuda, said Saturday.
The same day, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves cast the major powers' actions thus far as little more than “pious mouthings and marginal tinkering.”
“On this, humanity is at the midnight hour. Can we meet the challenge? We may not live to find out the answer if the usual continues,” the Caribbean nation's premier said.
Salvaging the economic fate of these countries is complex. Baptiste says there's no overarching policy aimed at retraining people whose livelihoods are vulnerable in new trades.
And Gössling argues that, while they're not the culprits behind global warming, the small island developing states aren't directly confronting the friction between climate change prevention measures and their tourism reliance.
“I also think there's never been serious efforts by the SIDS to actually also consider different economic sectors, because very often it's been very self-evident that you would focus on tourism, you would develop for tourism and that you, by definition, then almost would become dependent on tourism,” he said. “And I think the strange thing — this conflict has never been vocalized by SIDS.”
What has been vocalized is a clarion call for substantive action taken by rich, developed countries. Now that the ramifications of climate change have reached countries that could long pretend it didn't exist, the small island developing states hope the message is finally getting through.
The poet John Donne wrote that “no man is an island entire of itself.” In the same vein, Solih drove home the point the island nations have been making for years: “There is no guarantee of survival for any one nation in a world where the Maldives cease to exist.”


EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt is dodging the question of whether the president believes climate change is real and a threat to the U.S.
Pruitt spoke at a White House briefing the day after President Donald Trump said the U.S. will abandon the Paris climate accord.
Asked about Trump's views on climate change, Pruitt says they were focused on "one singular issue" - whether the Paris deal would be good or bad for the country.
He says Trump concluded it would put the nation at an economic disadvantage.
___
12:20 p.m.
Education Secretary Betsy DeVos says she believes the climate is changing but is refusing to discuss the implications of President Donald Trump's decision to withdraw from a major climate pact.
Asked during a visit to a charter school on Friday whether she believes in climate change, DeVos said, "Certainly, the climate changes, yes."
But she wouldn't answer a question about whether climate change was caused by human activity and its impact.
She said, "I think we are going to continue to be a part of that conversation as he is committed to doing."
DeVos on Thursday issued a statement backing Trump's decision as it rolls back "the unrealistic and overreaching regulatory actions" of the Obama administration.
The decision has been met with criticism from environmentalists around the world.
__
12:05 a.m.
A scientist who played a key role in international talks leading to the Paris accord says that pulling out the agreement will prove a significant loss to Americans who face rising sea levels, crop pests and more frequent heat waves.
Environmental scientist Joseph Alcamo, who directs a University of Sussex program, says that leaving the accord has to be "one of the most foolish and short-sighted decisions in American history."
He says "Trump may be able to withdraw from the agreement, but he can't withdraw from the atmosphere."
___
11:55 a.m.
India's prime minister says "Paris or no Paris" his country will be a responsible nation with regard to climate.
Modi declined to give a direct reply on whether India, a major emerging economy, would stick with the Paris Climate agreement following President Donald Trump's decision to pull out of the accord. He was addressing the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum on Friday during his official visit to Russia.
Modi said he was asked a similar question during his visit to Germany earlier this week, before the US decision was announced.
At the time, Modi said, he had replied "Paris or no Paris, it is our conviction that we have no right to snatch from our future generation their right to have a clean and beautiful earth." His remarks were reported by the Press Trust of India news agency.
___
10:55 a.m.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson says he believes the United States will keep reducing greenhouse gas emissions despite pulling out of the Paris climate change pact.
It's the first public comment on the decision from Tillerson, who had urged President Donald Trump not to abandon the deal.
Tillerson is downplaying the significance of Trump's decision to withdraw from the global agreement. He says it was a "policy decision" and that he hopes "people can keep it in perspective."
Tillerson says the U.S. has "a terrific record" in curbing greenhouse gas emissions. He says it's something the U.S. can be proud of. Tillerson points out those reductions took place even before the Paris agreement went into effect.
Tillerson spoke as he met Friday with Brazil's foreign minister.
___
10:20 a.m.
A top European Union official says the EU and China believe that President Donald Trump made a mistake by pulling the United States out of a landmark international climate agreement.
Standing alongside Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, EU Council President Donald Tusk said Friday that "We are convinced that yesterday's decision by the United States to leave the Paris agreement is a big mistake."
Brussels and Beijing are reaffirming their commitment to the agreement and laying out steps for achieving some of its goals.
___
10 a.m.
The U.S. withdrawal from the Paris climate deal is being met with despair in parts of Africa that are suffering from severe drought.
Sididi Ould Batna in Mali says he has lost a dozen of his cattle and now the food crisis is affecting families as well.
He says he would tell President Donald Trump that the misery is caused by climate change, "and if he doesn't pay attention the United States will be touched one day by these problems, too."
Vegetable seller Fanta Coulibaly in Mali's capital, Bamako, blames climate change for the lack of rain.
She says the Paris agreement has given her hope, "and I ask Trump to think of us."
___
9:45 a.m.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is trying to assuage concerns caused by President Donald Trump's decision to pull the United States out of the Paris climate accord, calling for a constructive dialogue on efforts needed to curb global warming.
Speaking Friday at an economic forum in St. Petersburg, Putin avoided criticizing Trump for the move that has caused international opprobrium.
He underlined the importance of the Paris climate accord, but noted that it's a framework agreement offering a broad room for maneuver for each signatory nation.
Putin also said that Trump's promise to negotiate new conditions for the U.S. leaves hope for reaching a compromise before the Paris deal is set to take effect in 2021. Putin added that U.S. participation is essential for the success of global efforts.
___
8:45 a.m.
Vice President Mike Pence says President Donald Trump's decision to abandon the climate change pact is "refreshing."
In an interview with Fox News' "Fox & Friends," Pence says the climate deal would have burdened taxpayers and he doesn't understand why Democrats have made the issue a priority.
Pence says the Paris deal "was a transfer of wealth from the most powerful economy in the world to other countries around the planet."
Democrats say jobs lost at polluting companies could be offset by new jobs in green technology. Scientists contend that Trump's decision could result in emissions of up to 3 billion tons of additional carbon dioxide a year - enough to melt ice sheets faster, raise seas higher and trigger more extreme weather.
___
8:10 a.m.
African nations are protesting the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris climate agreement as the world's poorest continent seeks financial help in combating global warming.
South Africa's government calls the U.S. pullout "an abdication of global responsibility."
The statement Friday by one of Africa's largest economies says the decision damages the rule of law and "trust between nations."
South Africa says the U.S. has a "moral obligation" to support poorer countries in the global effort against climate change.
___
8:05 a.m.
India has kept mum on whether the U.S. decision to pull out of the Paris climate treaty will affect its energy policy, and Prime Minister Narendra Modi has offered no reaction to Trump's decision.
But on Thursday while visiting Moscow, Modi signed a joint declaration with President Vladimir Putin committing India and Russia to working on global challenges like climate change, environmental protection and clean energy through scientific discoveries.
And earlier in the week in Berlin, Modi said it would be a "crime" to spoil the environment for future generations.
___
8:05 a.m.
British opposition politicians are accusing Prime Minister Theresa May of failing to stand up to the U.S. over its withdrawal from the Paris climate accord.
May's office says she spoke to President Donald Trump after his announcement and "expressed her disappointment with the decision." Downing Street says May "stressed that the U.K. remained committed to the Paris Agreement."
But Britain did not sign a joint statement by the leaders of Germany, France and Italy saying they regretted Trump's decision and stressing that the accord cannot be renegotiated.
Downing Street would not say whether May had been asked to sign it.
Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn accuses May of "subservience to Donald Trump."
Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon says not signing the declaration was an "appalling abdication of leadership."
___
8:05 a.m.
The Paris mayor says she's finally found one person who doesn't like her famed city: Donald Trump.
Mayor Anne Hidalgo responded to the U.S. president's comments that he's pulling out of the Paris climate agreement because he was elected to represent the people of Pittsburgh, not Paris.
Speaking to reporters Friday, she said, "He doesn't like Paris. He must be the only person on the planet who doesn't like Paris."
In seriousness, she added that his comments were "not up to the level of what one would expect from a president of a great nation that we love."
She insists that fighting climate change can create jobs, and calls Trump "a representative of a world gone by, a world that is looking back in the rear view mirror and does not see what is happening today."
___
8:05 a.m.
Germany's environment minister says "there will be no new deal with the United States" on climate change.
Barbara Hendricks reiterated the position Germany, France and Italy declared in a statement Thursday after President Donald Trump's announcement that he would withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate accord.
Hendricks told reporters Friday in Berlin that other countries will fill the leadership void left by the United States but none will be expected to make up the shortfall in emissions reductions caused by Washington's exit.
She adds that the global climate will "survive" Trump's maximum presidential term of eight years.
___
7:40 a.m.
Senior White House adviser Kellyanne Conway says the decision by the Trump administration to get out of the Paris climate change accords is about "fairness" to American workers and businesses.
Asked in a nationally broadcast interview whether President Donald Trump believes in the concept of global warming, Conway demurred, telling her interviewer to ask him.
"The president believes in a clean environment," she said in an appearance on Fox News Channel's "Fox & Friends" Friday.
"Why should we frontload so much of the economic burden in this agreement?" Conway said.
___
7:30 a.m.
A Japanese government official says Japan has decided not to join Germany, France and Italy in expressing regret over the decision by President Donald Trump's to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate accord.
The official, who declined to be identified by name or affiliation and requested anonymity because he wasn't authorized to speak publicly about the decision, said that Japan chose to issue its own statement, not as part of the group. He declined to give a reason or confirm if any of the three countries had invited Japan to sign a joint statement.
The prime minister's office said Japan shares the importance of the accord with those countries.
Japan's Foreign Ministry in a statement earlier Friday said the U.S. withdrawal decision was "regrettable" but hoped to explore ways to cooperate with Washington to address the climate change issues.
--By Mari Yamaguchi in Tokyo.
___
7 a.m.
A top atmospheric scientist at the U.N.'s weather agency says the "worst-case scenario" caused by the planned U.S. pullout from the Paris climate deal would be a further 0.3-degree Celsius (0.5 Fahrenheit) rise in global temperatures by 2100.
Deon Terblanche of the World Meteorological Organization says many factors affect temperatures, so an additional 0.3-percent increase from the possible U.S. pullout is "probably not what will happen."
He said Friday that the organization hasn't run any new scientific models following U.S. President Donald Trump's announcement that U.S. would pull out of the Paris accord.
The 2015 Paris agreement aims to prevent the Earth from heating up by any more than 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) by the end of the century, compared to before the start of the industrial age.
___
6:50 a.m.
U.S. taxpayers aren't the only ones pitching in to a global fund to help poor countries cope with rising seas and fight climate change.
President Donald Trump wants to stop contributing to the U.N.-managed Green Climate Fund, claiming that "nobody else is even close" to the $1 billion the U.S. has paid so far.
Yet other governments with smaller economies than the U.S. have invested significant amounts too.
The fund now has $694 million from Japan, $515 million from Britain, $460 million from Sweden and $420 million from Germany, in addition to contributions from dozens of other countries.
And per capita, some countries are promising much more than the U.S.
The U.S. pledges so far - including the $1 billion already paid and $2 billion promised by the Obama administration - add up to $9 per American, compared to $60 pledged from every Swede and $50 pledged from each Norwegian.
That's according to figures from the Seoul-based fund, meant to channel money to help poor countries fight and handle climate change.
___
6:30 a.m.
A former U.N. special envoy on climate change says the U.S. decision to pull out of the Paris climate deal renders the country "a rogue state on the international stage."
Mary Robinson spoke as part of a group of global leaders known as The Elders.
In their statement released Friday, former U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan calls climate change "the great existentialist threat of our time" and that the U.S. withdrawal weakens the Paris accord.
However, he said it does not "trigger its demise."
In the statement, The Elders also call on U.S. states and businesses to take action where the federal government has withdrawn. They also say the U.S. pullout weakens developing nations' trust in developed countries over who will fund the billions of dollars needed to combat climate change worldwide.
___
6:15 a.m.
The price of oil has fallen sharply as investors bet that President Donald Trump's decision to pull the United States out of the Paris climate agreement will increase the country's oil and gas production.
The international benchmark for crude oil was down 3 percent, or $1.49 a barrel, at $49.14 on Friday.
Analysts at German bank Commerzbank said in light of Trump's decision that it now expects the U.S. to expand its oil production "even more sharply." U.S. oil production has been increasing in recent months since the price of crude came off lows last year.
The increase in U.S. production is neutralizing the efforts of the OPEC cartel and other major oil-producing nations, like Russia, which are limiting their output in the hope of supporting prices.
___
5:55 a.m.
Dozens of Greenpeace supporters gathered at the gates of the United States embassy in the Spanish capital to protest President Donald Trump's decision to pull the U.S. out of the Paris climate agreement.
Protesters said that Trump was becoming a "global threat" and "harming the planet" in signs they held Friday morning at the entrance of the embassy in central Madrid.
Greenpeace's director in Spain Mario Rodriguez said Thursday's announcement will require U.S. civil society and companies - as well as the rest of the world - to work harder to fight global warming.
"The battle against climate change is irreversible," Rodriguez said. "Resistance will be maintained because the United States is much more than just the White House and Trump."
___
5:30 a.m.
U.N. Environment chief Erik Solheim says the decision by President Donald Trump to pull the U.S. out of the Paris climate accord "in no way brings an end to this unstoppable effort."
China, India, the European Union and others are already showing strong leadership, he added.
"A single political decision will not derail this unparalleled effort," Solheim said in a statement.
In a separate joint statement, the African Union and the European Union reaffirmed their commitment to the Paris accord and noted the "strong solidarity with those most vulnerable to climate change."
A number of African countries have expressed alarm at rising sea levels and changing weather patterns that have the potential to further disrupt the agriculture that so many on the world's poorest continent rely on to survive.
___
5:25 a.m.
The leader of the country to next hold the rotating presidency of the European Union says the "very bad, very negative" decision of President Donald Trump to pull the United States out of the global climate agreement will force the 28-nation bloc to take a stronger lead on the issue.
Estonian Prime Minister Juri Ratas said in an interview with The Associated Press that the Paris accord "was, and still is a very important goal to achieve."
He stressed all EU nations are sticking together to make the deal work and expressed his doubts that any country around the world would follow Trump's lead. "I hope that the number is zero," Ratas said.
Estonia will take over the rotating six-month presidency from Malta at the end of the month.
___
5:05 a.m.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel says the decision by President Donald Trump to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate accord "can't and won't stop all those of us who feel obliged to protect the planet."
Merkel said Friday that the announcement by Trump was "extremely regrettable and that's putting it very mildly."
But she told reporters in a brief statement that "it's now necessary to look forward after last night's announcement by the U.S. administration."
Merkel says Germany and others "will combine our forces more resolutely than ever ... to address and tackle big challenges for humanity such as climate change."
She adds that "we need this Paris agreement to preserve creation. Nothing can and will stop us from doing so."
___
3:40 a.m.
President Donald Trump says the U.S. could try to re-enter the international climate agreement sealed in Paris if the deal were more favorable to Americans.
Trump indicated that wasn't a priority as he explained why he was pulling the U.S. out of the Paris accord in the first place. In a Rose Garden announcement Thursday, the president framed the decision as one made in the best interest of his country.
Many U.S. allies are expressing alarm over the U.S. abandoning the chief effort to slow the planet's warming. The leaders of France, Germany and Italy joined to "note with regret" the Trump decision and express doubts about any change in the accord.
Several of Trump's top aides also opposed the action, including his daughter Ivanka Trump.

Given the emotional reactions that Donald Trump and climate change each trigger separately, they are especially combustible when combined.
New York Times columnist Paul Krugman worries that Trump's election "may have killed the planet." Activist Bill McKibben calls Trump's plan to reverse the Obama climate agenda by approving the Keystone XL pipeline and other fossil-fuel projects, rescinding the Clean Power Plan, and withdrawing from the Paris climate agreement "the biggest, most against-the-odds and most irrevocable bet any president has ever made about anything." And let's not forget "Zach," the Democratic National Committee staffer who reportedly stormed out of a post-election meeting after saying, "I am going to die from climate change."
A Trump presidency raises many serious and reasonable worries. But the fear that it will cause climate change to kill the planet, or even poor Zach, should not be among them. The most authoritative scientific and economic analyses estimate that even if climate change proceeds unmitigated for the next hundred years, the cost will be real but manageable. Even if President Trump reverses President Obama's efforts, the marginal effect on future climate change will be minimal because Obama's efforts were so inconsequential.
The Obama administration's own "Social Cost of Carbon" analysis, developed to demonstrate the enormous cost of climate change (and thus the enormous benefit of reducing carbon dioxide emissions), provides a perfect illustration. The analysis synthesized multiple efforts to quantify in economic terms the projected effects of climate change on everything from agriculture to public health to sea levels, looking all the way ahead to the year 2100. But how much worse off than today did it find the world will be by century's end with no efforts to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions?
The world will be at least five times wealthier. Zach might even live to see it.
The Obama administration used three economic models to reach this conclusion, but let's consider the one with the highest estimates for future climate costs: the Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy (DICE) model, developed by William Nordhaus at Yale University. DICE estimates that global GDP in 2100 without climate change would be $510 trillion. That's 575 percent higher than in 2015. The cost of climate change, the model estimates, will amount to almost 4 percent of GDP in that year. But the remaining GDP of $490 trillion is still 550 percent larger than today's GDP.
DICE assumes the average annual growth of global GDP will be 2.27 percent if there is no climate change. With climate change, that rate falls to 2.22 percent; at no point does climate change shave even one-tenth of one point off growth. By 2103, the climate-change-afflicted world surpasses the prosperity of the not-warming 2100.
Zach might take issue with DICE's underlying scientific and economic assumptions, yet the model produces estimates of cost due to climate change that are much higher than those of the PAGE and FUND models, which are also used in "The Social Cost of Carbon" analysis. Certainly, all three models suffer from an inability to assign economic value to every possible form of climate damage. But these models and methodologies are not the choice of partisans hoping to downplay the issue; they are the ones endorsed by an Obama administration intent on demonstrating large benefits from climate action. And their forecasts bear no resemblance to the frequently issued prophecies of doom.
What the models do show is that the threat of climate change cannot compete with the power of compounding economic growth over a century-long timescale. In concrete terms, a GDP increase of 500-600 percent implies a world in which most of the population is approaching the West's current standard of living while the West advances as well. Transformations in infrastructure, public health, and food and water systems will greatly improve society's resilience against potential climate costs. Against that backdrop, the exact cost of climate change is beside the point. Whether annual cost in 2100 equals 4 percent of that year's GDP or 14 percent, the world in 2100 would be vastly wealthier than it is today. The cost is real, and represents a tragic drain on resources, but it sits comfortably within the margin of the costs and benefits associated with many policy choices when compounded for so many decades.
Once upon a time, "Obey the models" was a central demand of the climate movement. Faced with actual model output of costs that fail to support the movement's apocalyptic rhetoric, the demand is now to ignore the models and focus instead on hypothetical worst cases. For instance, Zach has probably been reading the latest outlier papers that warn of sudden collapses in ice sheets leading to the inundation of coastal cities. But the U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) -- the gold-standard synthesis of the latest science -- estimates that climate change will cause sea levels to rise by less than two feet this century.
Other scenarios, such as the one used by Harvard economist Martin Weitzman to suggest that climate change poses nearly infinite risk, emphasize "runaway" climate change in which positive feedback loops could make the earth's temperature spiral out of control long after 2100. But cost forecasts for 2200 or 2300 are difficult to credit and almost impossible to weigh against the hypothetical state of human society so many generations hence.
Regardless of whether one's expectations are apocalyptic, the magnitude of future climate change is only half the story. Of equal importance, attributing blame to the incoming Trump administration requires some demonstration that Trump will place the world on a significantly higher trajectory of greenhouse-gas emissions than another president would have. But the climate agenda that Trump intends to unravel is a failure by that standard already. Because President Obama's policies have achieved no meaningful progress, reversing them cannot have any significant cost.
Domestically, even the EPA has acknowledged that its Clean Power Plan will not substantially influence future temperatures. The State Department has said the same about blocking the Keystone XL pipeline. The purported value of these policies was to display international "leadership." But the global picture is no better. Even with U.S. "leadership," the commitments other countries made under last year's "landmark" Paris agreement look almost identical to the paths those countries were already on.
China, for instance, pledged to reach "peak" greenhouse-gas emissions "around 2030," but prior analysis suggested that China's emissions would peak in 2030 anyway. India promised only to reduce its level of emissions per unit of GDP, which was already declining at twice the rate it pledged to achieve going forward. Pakistan "committed to reduce its emissions after reaching peak levels to the extent possible," offering nothing but a definition of the word "peak." When Secretary of State John Kerry said, "One hundred eighty-six nations in the world came together to submit a plan, all of them reducing their emissions," those were the kinds of non-committal commitments he was hawking.
Adding together a lot of nothings produces nothing; therefore the Paris agreement's impact is at best a few tenths of a degree Celsius. MIT's Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, for instance, projected warming by 2100 of 3.9 degrees Celsius without the Paris agreement and 3.7 degrees with it.
Proponents of the agreement argue that it will nonetheless unleash clean-energy investment. Instead, investment has plummeted. Over the first three quarters of 2016, global clean-energy investment is down 29 percent relative to 2015. Investment in the third quarter of 2016 was 43 percent lower than in the third quarter of 2015, having fallen to its lowest level since the George W. Bush administration.
Bizarrely, some analysts have reversed course about the need for U.S. "leadership" and now argue that if the United States abandons the Paris agreement, we will be left behind while the world continues with climate action. Alden Meyer, director of policy and strategy at the Union of Concerned Scientists, told The Atlantic, "China, Europe, Brazil, India, and other countries will continue to move ahead with the climate commitments they made under Paris no matter what the next president does, because these commitments are in their own national interest."
That only confirms the weakness of the Paris agreement and the futility of President Obama's climate agenda. If every nation is still just pursuing its national interest, what has American "leadership" accomplished? And what could be lost if Trump pursued a different agenda?
Those claiming sudden panic would have us believe the world was so close to solving this climate-change thing until Donald Trump came along. But in fact, the world was still on square one.
That might suggest that the next administration's policy will be more important than ever. But fears that the next four years represent "Game Over" for the climate are only the latest repeat of Al Gore's warning in 2006 that the world would reach a point of no return within ten years; former IPCC head Rajendra Pachauri's warning in 2007 that "if there's no action before 2012, that's too late"; NASA climate scientist James Hansen's warning in 2009 that President Obama "has four years to save Earth"; and U.N. Foundation president Tim Wirth's warning in 2012 that Obama's second term was "the last window of opportunity." Nor is there any evidence a President Hillary Clinton would have improved on Obama's record.
Conversely, while Trump embarrasses himself and the country by calling climate change a "hoax," his climate policies mirror those outlined by his more conventional GOP primary opponents in 2016 and by GOP nominee Mitt Romney in 2012. Hyperbolic warnings about Trump that emphasize climate are not really about Trump at all -- they are about Democrats losing to Republicans. Paul Krugman reflected the morning after the election on "the immense damage Trump will surely do, to climate above all." The Atlantic's Peter Beinart listed climate change as the first "enormous danger" posed by Trump that might justify the Electoral College in overriding the election's outcome and choosing Clinton. They should save their extreme rhetoric about Trump for the facets of Trump that are in fact extreme.
As for Zach and the activists who can think only of climate? They should be relieved that Trump's election will prevent them from ever being held accountable for the costly and ineffective policies they pursued. They might also be relieved to learn that -- even with no climate policy at all -- the world will continue to grow healthier and wealthier. posed by Trump that might justify the Electoral College in overriding the election's outcome and choosing Clinton. They should save their extreme rhetoric about Trump for the facets of Trump that are in fact extreme.
As for Zach and the activists who can think only of climate? They should be relieved that Trump's election will prevent them from ever being held accountable for the costly and ineffective policies they pursued. They might also be relieved to learn that -- even with no climate policy at all -- the world will continue to grow healthier and wealthier.


The Biden administration is taking steps to address the economic risks from climate change, issuing a 40-page report Friday on government-wide plans to protect the financial, insurance and housing markets and the savings of American families.
The report lays out steps that could potentially alter the mortgage process, stock market disclosures, retirement plans, federal procurement and government budgeting.
It's a follow-up to a May executive order by President Joe Biden that essentially calls on the government to analyze how the world's largest economy could be affected by extreme heat, flooding, storms, wildfires and the broader adjustments needed to address climate change.
“If this year has shown us anything, it’s that climate change poses an ongoing urgent and systemic risk to our economy and to the lives and livelihoods of everyday Americans, and we must act now,” Gina McCarthy, the White House national climate adviser, told reporters.
A February storm in Texas led to widespread power outages, 210 deaths and severe property damage. Wildfires raged in Western states. The heat dome in the Pacific Northwest caused record temperatures in Seattle and Portland, Oregon. Hurricane Ida struck Louisiana in August and caused deadly flooding in the Northeast.
The actions being recommended by the Biden administration reflect a significant shift in the broader discussion about climate change, suggesting that the nation must prepare for the costs that families, investors and governments will bear.
The report is also an effort to showcase to the world how serious the U.S. government is about tackling climate change ahead of the United Nations Climate Change Conference running from Oct. 31 to Nov. 12 in Glasgow, Scotland.
Among the steps outlined is the government's Financial Stability Oversight Council developing the tools to identify and lessen climate-related risks to the economy. The Treasury Department plans to address the risks to the insurance sector and availability of coverage. The Securities and Exchange Commission is looking at mandatory disclosure rules about the opportunities and risks generated by climate change.
The Labor Department on Wednesday proposed a rule for investment managers to factor environmental decisions into the choices made for pensions and retirement savings. The Office of Management and Budget announced the government will begin the process of asking federal agencies to consider greenhouse gas emissions from the companies providing supplies. Biden's budget proposal for fiscal 2023 will feature an assessment of climate risks.
Federal agencies involved in lending and mortgages for homes are looking for the impact on the housing market, with the Department of Housing and Urban Development and its partners developing disclosures for homebuyers and flood and climate-related risks. The Department of Veterans Affairs will also look at climate risks for its home lending program.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is updating the standards for its National Flood Insurance Program, potentially revising guidelines that go back to 1976.
“We now do recognize that climate change is a systemic risk,” McCarthy said. “We have to look fundamentally at the way the federal government does its job and how we look at the finance system and its stability.”nsider greenhouse gas emissions from the companies providing supplies. Biden's budget proposal for fiscal 2023 will feature an assessment of climate risks.
Federal agencies involved in lending and mortgages for homes are looking for the impact on the housing market, with the Department of Housing and Urban Development and its partners developing disclosures for homebuyers and flood and climate-related risks. The Department of Veterans Affairs will also look at climate risks for its home lending program.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is updating the standards for its National Flood Insurance Program, potentially revising guidelines that go back to 1976.
“We now do recognize that climate change is a systemic risk,” McCarthy said. “We have to look fundamentally at the way the federal government does its job and how we look at the finance system and its stability.”


This week, an intergovernmental panel of scientists reported that climate change is already having sweeping effects on every continent and throughout the world's oceans - and that the problem is likely to grow substantially worse unless greenhouse emissions are brought under control. 
Over the years on The Learning Network, we've published scores of lesson plans and other resources related to the topic of climate change, and in 2010 we collected them all on            one page. 
Below, we update that old collection with seven starting points for teaching and learning about the topic, along with a new list of links to much more, from Learning Network lesson plans to Times video, graphics, articles and photographs.
 Seven Teaching Ideas  
 1. Study the Science 
From the polar vortex to the            flooded streets in Los Angeles, there's no doubt that it's been a crazy winter. But is one crazy winter enough to suggest that the climate is changing? In            "Freezing Out the Bigger Picture," the Times reporter Justin Gillis answers the question, "If the world is really warming up, how come it is so darned cold?"
Have students consider the various lines of evidence showing that the climate is changing, and that humans - and their greenhouse gas emissions - are the ones            responsible for this change.  The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change just issued a            report detailing how climate change will affect people around the world. What evidence do the scientists on the panel use to support their predictions? What, if anything, can be done to mitigate some of the effects of climate change? 
 2. Make Climate Change Local 
Melting ice caps and rising sea levels get a lot of attention in the conversation about climate change. But those effects can feel remote to people not living in the coastal communities affected by this aspect of climate change. To that end, the White House recently started a new website that shows how climate change will affect communities across the United States.  How might your community be affected? 
Consider how climate change will affect the forests, rivers and lakes of North America, or how a warming climate favors            introduced species.  Climate change affects            public health as well. What are some of the public health concerns associated with climate change in your state or region? Wrap up by having students answer our Student Opinion question,            "How Concerned Are You About Climate Change?"
 3. Map Climate Change 
Climate change, and the resulting rise in sea levels, is likely to flood many parts of the world, while generating weather extremes like extended droughts and heat waves in other places. Have students annotate a            map of the world, showing how climate change will affect different regions, and how it is already affecting the people of            Bangladesh.   How should governments prepare for these changes, and what kinds of            climate change preparedness plans are already in place? 
 4. Play With Climate Change 
Have students outline the plot for a novel or play in which the characters in some way face the consequences of climate change.  Or, students might write a first-person essay reflecting their own thoughts about what climate change means to them.  Alternatively, students could play a few            climate change games and then develop the outline for their own interactive game or app that would            teach about the effects of climate change.
 5. Design and Propose Solutions 
Climate change is happening right now, and many experts say now is the time for people to prepare for how it might affect communities across the United States and around the globe.  Have students propose ways to            prepare for the            projected effects of climate change, from increased droughts and wildfires to the greater spread of insect-borne diseases. Find out if your state is part of the Centers for Disease Control            Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative and consider some of the strategies different municipalities are adopting. Students also might form teams to take on the            Coastal Vulnerability Innovation Challenge and propose tools to help members of your community better understand how climate change, and its associated coastal flooding, might affect you.  
 6. Debate Responsibility 
Many of the world's poorest nations contribute the least to the fossil fuel emissions largely responsible for climate change - yet these places will bear most of the consequences of climate change, like extreme coastal flooding. It's a discrepancy that held up recent United Nations climate talks in Warsaw, with poor and low-lying nations arguing that the costs of disasters such as droughts, floods and hurricanes            should be borne by the wealthier nations that have historically polluted the atmosphere with greenhouse gases.  Do those nations whose emissions contributed the most to climate change have a moral responsibility to pay for the effects of those emissions? And if so, how would they pay, and who would determine the kinds of damages those nations should be responsible for? 
 7. Investigate Climate Politics 
While a vast majority of scientists agree that climate change is real and presents a serious danger, some politicians in Washington still seem to be unconvinced. There's a whole camp of            climate denialists. And some people are just            confused about how the earth can be warming when we have just experienced such an unusually cold winter in the central and eastern United States.    
Have students read a recent Times Op-Ed "Climate Signals, Growing Louder." Do students agree with the statement, "Perhaps now the deniers will cease their attacks on the science of climate change, and the American public will, at last, fully accept that global warming is a danger now and an even graver threat to future generations?" Why or why not?

