For many, thinking about the future of our planet is terrifying. According to a global survey reported by the BBC, 56 percent of young people believe that humanity is doomed because of climate change and 45 percent say that their anxiety about the climate affects their daily lives. Here in the US, the story is much the same; three-quarters of Americans believe that climate change will result in the extinction of man, and one in five millennials believe that that extinction will occur within their lifetime.
A college student recently wrote the following in a campus newspaper about her climate anxiety:
I stay up into the early hours of the morning, Googling some variation of "Is there hope for climate change," and "Biden climate change plan good?" (...) I fret over every piece of waste I encounter, wondering whether I should trash it or wash it and hope it qualifies for the recycling bin. What if I wash the aluminum foil I heated leftover lasagna on, does it become recyclable then? The anxiety is crippling.
Many young people clearly are suffering intense climate anxiety. And who can blame them? Because so much of the information they consume on the issue - both from the news media and social media - is apocalyptic in nature, this is an inevitable outcome.
But is the messaging they are receiving even true? Is the anxiety they are feeling justified?
A sober examination of the facts and the science would suggest not.
Here's the truth: Climate change is indeed real and has mostly negative effects; however, climate change is not the end of the world.
So, in an effort to make the facts clear and perhaps provide a more comforting alternative to the dominant narrative among my peers, here are a few of the most common myths about the environment, debunked.
Myth #1: Human Extinction Due To Climate Change Is Imminent
At the source of much anxiety about climate change is the belief that humans are likely to go extinct sometime in the near future due to its effects. But that belief is just not correct.
Even the scientists most concerned about climate change rebuke this assertion. Michael Mann, who is a professor of atmospheric science at Penn State and a superstar of the movement to fight climate change, wrote that "There is no evidence of climate change scenarios that would render human beings extinct."
In Michael Shellenberger's book, Apocalypse Never, he notes that Stanford University atmospheric scientist Ken Caldeira also said that "climate change does not threaten human extinction."
Some of the fear about human extinction undoubtedly started after Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez declared, in 2019, that "The world is going to end in twelve years if we don't address climate change." But, as Shellenberger documents in his book, climate scientists from NASA said that "All the time-limited frames are bulls--t," and a paleoclimate researcher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison said that her statement was a "mischaracterization."
In short, there are virtually no scientists who believe, and there is no science to support, the idea that humans will go extinct from climate change.
Myth #2: The Climate Is Getting Substantially More Dangerous for Humans
Usually stemming from the belief that humans will go extinct from climate change is the perception that it is currently making life substantially more dangerous for humans. But, in fact, humans are actually much more protected from climate-related disasters than we were just 100 years ago.
Bjorn Lomborg, who is a visiting professor at Copenhagen Business School and a visiting fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, has shown - based on data from the International Disaster Database - that the individual risk of a climate-related death (ie. from hurricanes, droughts, extreme temperatures, etc.) has declined by 98.9% since 1920.
It is certainly the case that models project storms and other climate-related events to get more intense going forward. But (aside from the fact models have historically failed to accurately predict future climate developments) that does not necessarily mean the positive trend over the past 100 years will reverse itself.
Yes, there is climate danger. But there is also climate resilience. The reason for the dramatic reduction in climate-related deaths over the past 100 years has been the rapid economic and technological development that has characterized the US during that time. Whether it be more reliable infrastructure, access to cheap energy, or a better ability to forecast severe weather events before they take place, these have all led to rising human safety even in the face of climate change. And this has not only been observed in the US, but in countries around the world.
FEE's Saul Zimet summed it up well when he wrote:
The climate resilience side of the equation, despite being at least as significant as the climate danger side, is often ignored in the models of future climate impact. This is because, while it is difficult to model a changing climate, it is impossible to model the future of human ingenuity, which will be composed of decisions and insights that only the people of the future can possibly know.
Myth #3: Natural Disasters Are Getting Substantially More Frequent And Severe
Every time there is a devastating hurricane, drought, heatwave, or wildfire, one can reliably expect the headlines in media outlets ranging from the New York Times to CNN to imply that these disasters are not only getting more frequent, but also more severe, due to climate change.
Hurricanes

The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory - which operates within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research - writes that "There is no strong evidence of increasing trends in U.S. landfalling hurricanes or major hurricanes, or of Atlantic basin-wide hurricanes or major hurricanes since the late 1800s."
Aside from frequency, there is also the issue of intensity, of which there are two aspects. The first is how intense the storm itself is and the second is how much damage there is as a consequence of the storm. On the first question, the evidence is mixed. On the second question, it is true but misleading to say that the economic costs of natural disasters, including hurricanes, have gotten worse.
When Pielke Jr. looked into economic damages from natural disasters over time as a percentage of GDP, he found that they have actually declined.
The cost of natural disasters has been going down since 1990
Even so, the rising dollar number with respect to damages is often cited as evidence that hurricanes are getting worse. In Congressional Democrats' letter advocating for a new Civilian Climate Corps (CCC), for example, they justified their claim of a "record-breaking cyclone season" by writing the following:
The United States experienced 22 billion-dollar weather and climate disasters in 2020, shattering the previous annual record of 16 events. 2020 was the worst fire season on record, burning over 10.2 million acres and costing over $16 billion in damages and $3 billion in suppression costs. The U.S. experienced a record-breaking 30 named tropical cyclones, 7 of which became billion-dollar disasters-also a new record.
But measuring the severity of hurricanes by how much economic damage they cause is misguided because, as Bjorn Lomborg explains in his book False Alarm, it fails to take into account a phenomenon known as the "expanding bull's-eye effect." He writes:
Similar climate impacts will result in more costly disasters because an increasing number of people with more and more valuable assets are at risk. The expanding bull's-eye effect can be thought of as an archery target, with the rings (showing population density) telling us how many people and possessions are at risk of being hit by an imaginary arrow, or natural disaster.
As the human population increases and development takes up a greater proportion of total land - especially in high-risk areas - more natural disasters will inevitably hit somewhere within the bull's eye, thus causing more economic damage than if there was no development there. Over the past 100 years, such development and population increase have been widespread in the US. As a result, we would expect more people to now take up space within the bull's-eye.
Wildfires
Similarly, when it comes to wildfires, the number of acres burned annually has decreased dramatically over time. In 2014, researchers from Auburn University and the Georgia Institute of Technology found "a significant declining trend" of global burned area since 1900. Based on this study, Lomborg writes "the global amount of area burned has declined by more than 540,000 square miles, from 1.9 million square miles in the early part of last century to 1.4 million square miles today"
He has also, based on publicly available data, compiled his own numbers on the area burned in the US since 1900 as a consequence of wildfires. His data show a similar trend, with burned area reducing dramatically over time.
Moreover, a 2017 study published in Science found that "global burned area declined by ∼25% over the past 18 years."
Despite these facts, it is also clear that more homes are now subject to the effects of wildfires than ever before. However, the reason for this can also be explained by the expanding bull's-eye effect. In False Alarm, Lomborg notes that in 1940, there were only about 500,000 homes in high-fire-risk zones, but it was almost 7 million by 2010. To put that in perspective, the rate at which housing increased in high-fire-risk zones was more than 3 times higher than it was for the country generally. It should therefore be no surprise that more families' homes are at risk today than they have been in the past.
The Takeaway
Over the next 100 years, we should expect temperatures to continue to rise - just as they have in recent history. Along with that, we should expect some of the negative effects of climate change to continue as well.
However, this does not mean the world is ending; it does not mean you should stay up at night crippled with anxiety over the climate; it does not mean we should panic. Rather, we must understand why humanity has been able to adapt to a changing climate thus far and what steps are necessary to ensure human flourishing for generations to come.ires. His data show a similar trend, with burned area reducing dramatically over time.

Moreover, a 2017 study published in Science found that "global burned area declined by ∼25% over the past 18 years."
Despite these facts, it is also clear that more homes are now subject to the effects of wildfires than ever before. However, the reason for this can also be explained by the expanding bull's-eye effect. In False Alarm, Lomborg notes that in 1940, there were only about 500,000 homes in high-fire-risk zones, but it was almost 7 million by 2010. To put that in perspective, the rate at which housing increased in high-fire-risk zones was more than 3 times higher than it was for the country generally. It should therefore be no surprise that more families' homes are at risk today than they have been in the past.
The Takeaway
Over the next 100 years, we should expect temperatures to continue to rise - just as they have in recent history. Along with that, we should expect some of the negative effects of climate change to continue as well.
However, this does not mean the world is ending; it does not mean you should stay up at night crippled with anxiety over the climate; it does not mean we should panic. Rather, we must understand why humanity has been able to adapt to a changing climate thus far and what steps are necessary to ensure human flourishing for generations to come.




"Nothing in all the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity." - Martin Luther King Jr.
Dr. King didn't know the half of it.
Those words, after all, are from 1963. Back then, the idea of U.S. citizens and lawmakers attacking their own democracy would have been unthinkable, flouting precautions in a deadly pandemic unimaginable, ignoring a threat to our very planet inconceivable. Of course, back then, information came through a few reliable conduits: Walter Cronkite, Chet Huntley, David Brinkley, the local paper.
There was no social media. The production and distribution of information had not yet become the province of any and everybody.
Things have changed. The unthinkable, the unimaginable and the inconceivable are hard upon us. We face not one, but three simultaneous existential emergencies, and while each is distinct, it's time we understood that, ultimately, they are not different threats at all, but rather different manifestations of the same threat. Meaning that the insurrection crisis, the COVID-19 crisis and the climate-change crisis are really, at bottom, just facets of a misinformation crisis.
If you consider how belief in risibly false information ginned up by social media - e.g., Donald Trump won, vaccines magnetize skin, cold snaps disprove global warming - has impeded if not paralyzed our response to these and other issues, the truth of it becomes evident. Cronkite, Huntley and Brinkley are long dead, the local paper just a shadow of itself. Social media purport to fill the void and as a direct result, misinformation has reached critical levels.
It's not that no one saw this coming. Warnings go back at least two decades, including in this very space. But the threat seemed so theoretical. Who knew that it would have such real and profound effects? Who knew it would cleave this country - this planet - like an axe, splitting the informed off so decisively from the proudly misinformed, the adherents to crackpot theories and screwball beliefs that would have been laughed off the public stage in 1963 but that, in 2021, find strength in numbers and validation online? And that now emerge as a clear and present danger.
Just this week, for instance, a United Nations panel issued a report warning that climate change has brought us to the point of catastrophe: "code red for humanity." It's a truth underscored by our own eyes, by the hundred-year events that now happen every year: devastating floods, blistering heat, raging fires, rampaging storms. The damage, we are told, is irreversible. We can only mitigate it.
You'd think such a dire prognosis would leave us united on the need for immediate action, but Fox "News" saw little to worry about, bringing on climate denier Marc Morano to assure viewers that the U.N. just wants to take their cars. "You're being conned," he said, "if you're falling for this U.N. report."
And so it goes.
The need to teach our children well - media literacy and critical thinking, in particular - has never felt more urgent. Indeed, it is not too much to call it a matter of survival. After all, the insurrection crisis threatens our country, the COVID crisis threatens our health and the climate crisis threatens the only planet we've got. But the misinformation crisis either caused or exacerbated them all. So the obvious epitaph if we do not survive these challenges would be ignominious, but fair:
Too stupid to live.
 We can only mitigate it.
You'd think such a dire prognosis would leave us united on the need for immediate action, but Fox "News" saw little to worry about, bringing on climate denier Marc Morano to assure viewers that the U.N. just wants to take their cars. "You're being conned," he said, "if you're falling for this U.N. report."
And so it goes.
The need to teach our children well - media literacy and critical thinking, in particular - has never felt more urgent. Indeed, it is not too much to call it a matter of survival. After all, the insurrection crisis threatens our country, the COVID crisis threatens our health and the climate crisis threatens the only planet we've got. But the misinformation crisis either caused or exacerbated them all. So the obvious epitaph if we do not survive these challenges would be ignominious, but fair:
Too stupid to live.



Ugandan climate activist Vanessa Nakate said Wednesday that youth delegates meeting in Milan want to see immediate action from leaders at the U.N. climate talks in Glasgow, Scotland - not cheap, last-ditch grasps at supporting polluting fuels before getting down to business. 
Nakate is among 400 activists invited to Italy's financial capital for a three-day Youth4Climate meeting that will draft a document for the 26th Climate Change Conference of the Parties, which opens on Oct. 31. 
"If leaders and governments are going to talk about net zeroes or cutting emissions, halving emissions by 2030 or 2040 or 2050, that means it has to start now," Nakate told The Associated Press. 
"It doesn't mean, if we are going to do it by 2030, between now and 2030 let's open a coal power plant, you know, let's frack some gas, or let us construct an oil pipeline. That is not the real climate action that we want,'' she said. ""If you are to go net zero by 2030, it has to start now.''
Although the activists have traveled to Milan from 180 countries, Nakate said many have the feeling that their suggestions for the closing document that will be published Thursday are not welcome. She said the dynamic was "concerning."
"It really feels like everything has been decided for us,'' Nakate, a 24-year-old with a degree in business administration. Swedish activist Greta Thunberg similarly accused the organizers on Tuesday of bringing in "cherry-picked" delegates and pretending to listen.
But she said young people were speaking up, and had created their own working group on fossil fuels. 
"Hopefully it's something they can accept,'' she said.
Nakate gave an emotional opening speech to the gathering on Tuesday, calling out leaders for failing to meet financial pledges and describing the devastating impact of climate change at home in Uganda. While she said she was overwhelmed by the support she has received after her speech, she rejected the media's tendency to dub leaders of the movement. 
"It's how people portray the climate movement,'' Nakate said. "It is not just one face or two faces. It's communities. It is people who are organizing in different countries. I think that is the true face of the climate movement. The people who are standing up for the planet and a better future."
In 2020, Nakate was cropped out of an Associated Press photo at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. The AP apologized and acknowledged mistakes in how it initially responded.
Pope Francis on Wednesday praised young environmental activists for challenging global leaders to make good on promises to curb emissions and insisted that political leaders make wise decisions to promote "a culture of responsible sharing."
Francis thanked the activists for their "dreams and good projects" and encouraged them to form an educational alliance to help "rebuild the fabric" of humanity through care for the planet. 
"This vision is capable of challenging the adult world, for it reveals that you are prepared not only for action, but also for patient listening, constructive dialogue and mutual understanding," he said. 
Francis has made care for "our common home" of the Earth a hallmark of his papacy and devoted an entire encyclical to the issue in 2015. The Scottish bishops conference has said it expects Francis to attend the Glasgow climate summit, though the Vatican hasn't yet confirmed his presence. 
"It is time to take wise decisions so that we can make use of the many experiences gained in recent years, in order to make possible a culture of care, a culture of responsible sharing," Francis said in the message.
 curb emissions and insisted that political leaders make wise decisions to promote "a culture of responsible sharing."
Francis thanked the activists for their "dreams and good projects" and encouraged them to form an educational alliance to help "rebuild the fabric" of humanity through care for the planet. 
"This vision is capable of challenging the adult world, for it reveals that you are prepared not only for action, but also for patient listening, constructive dialogue and mutual understanding," he said. 
Francis has made care for "our common home" of the Earth a hallmark of his papacy and devoted an entire encyclical to the issue in 2015. The Scottish bishops conference has said it expects Francis to attend the Glasgow climate summit, though the Vatican hasn't yet confirmed his presence. 
"It is time to take wise decisions so that we can make use of the many experiences gained in recent years, in order to make possible a culture of care, a culture of responsible sharing," Francis said in the message.



As the mayoral race heats up, so has the issue of climate change.
Incumbent Mayor Rick Kriseman is using the global phenomenon to attack former Mayor Rick Baker.
Kriseman, a Democrat, signed a resolution with more than 300 other mayors to uphold the Paris agreement on climate change after President Donald Trump pulled the United States out of the accord on June 1.
The Kriseman campaign then assailed Baker, a Republican, for his silence over Trump's stance and actions on climate change. The incumbent mayor said local leaders must step up in the face of the federal retreat on climate issues - especially in a waterfront city, in a state already affected by climate change.
"It sends an important message to the community," Kriseman said. "Mayors around the country recognize that as leaders of our community, we have to send a message about the importance of the issue.
"Mayors are the elected officials closest to the people."
Baker said he doesn't dispute that the climate is changing. But he said he's unsure of the role humans play in the warming of the earth and its consequences: the rise in sea levels and decline in ice sheets.
"You can't look at the polar ice caps and not know that climate change is going on," Baker said. "Man has had an effect, the extent of that effect is up to great debate right now."
Rather than arguing about the origins of the crisis, Baker said, leaders should act.
"No matter what you believe," he said, "the important thing is to reduce carbon in the atmosphere."
Yet Baker was dismissive of Kriseman's activism in signing the national mayor's petition.
"Just sign a letter?" Baker said. "You haven't done anything."
- - -
Kriseman begged to differ and pointed to his past acts. The mayor signed an executive order in late 2015 committing the city to operate totally on clean energy. He also launched a campaign to qualify St. Petersburg as a five-star community with a national sustainability organization.
He also rattled off a list of projects undertaken since he took office in 2014: Solar panels at parks; geothermal energy at North Shore Park; a bike share program; and a seagrass mitigation bank to boost preservation.
"This is not an issue that, come election year, I've come to the table on," Kriseman said.
His environmental credentials, however, suffered a serious blow last year: the city's sewer system was swamped by a tropical storm and a hurricane and released 200 million gallons of sewage since August 2015 - much of it into Tampa Bay.
Baker touted his own environmental bonafides: A seat on two statewide commissions; the city's initial designation as a green city when he first served as mayor from 2001-10; undertaking the first efforts to make city buildings more energy efficient; and the cleanup of Lake Maggiore.
Said Baker: "We were very, very conscious of the environment in my administration."
As the Kriseman campaign starts criticizing Baker over climate change, so too is the former mayor fond of using the sewage crisis to batter Kriseman.
"When you dump sewage into the bay, it's hard to maintain your green city status," Baker said. It is a line he has used repeatedly on the campaign trail.
Kriseman volleyed back with a familiar argument he's been making on the campaign trail: He said he inherited those leaky sewer pipes and aging system from his predecessors, including Baker.
"I was the only mayor that has invested resources to make sure it doesn't happen again," Kriseman said. He has proposed a $304 million plan to fix the city's sewage system.
However, that's also part of a pending consent order with the state Department of Environmental Protection compelling the city to fix its sewer woes. There's also an ongoing state criminal inquiry into the city's sewage problems.
- - -
The mayoral contest is a nonpartisan race. But the politics of climate change has become a partisan issue in local elections, said Edward A. Parson, an environmental law professor at UCLA and co-author of The Science and Politics of Global Climate Change. That trend has only accelerated since Trump's decision to pull out of the Paris climate accord.
Baker is hardly the only politician to claim that there's still a scientific debate about the causes of climate change, Parson said. So do most Republicans.
Parson was blunt: "That's a crock of hogwash."
The science on humans' role in climate change is settled, he said.
But the professor said Baker's belief that government leaders need to reduce the release of carbon into the atmosphere is a break from Republican ideology.
The GOP usually justifies the party's uncertainty on climate change as a reason not to curb carbon emissions, Parson said. But scientists agree that man-made carbon dioxide is adding to the "greenhouse effect" that traps heat radiating from the Earth, warming the planet.
Kriseman, however, has also used climate change to defend his record.
The mayor has framed the massive sewage spills during his tenure partially as a consequence of a changing climate. But by attributing individual weather events - 2016's Hurricane Hermine helped flood the city's sewer system - to climate change, Parson said the mayor is guessing at a phenomenon that scientists are still studying.
"What (Kriseman) is saying might be true," Parson said, "but the act of attributing a single event to a big trend is actually very difficult."
Parson said it was akin to trying to figure out if a single home run hit by baseball great Barry Bonds can be attributed to Bonds' admitted use of steroids. But Bonds also hit home runs before he started taking performance-enhancing drugs.
- - -
In the end, Parson said, local leaders need to be heard on climate change. But he admitted that their ability to mitigate its effects is extremely limited.
"It's a shame, local government has to be a partner in adaptation," he said, "but local government is not the sensible or ideal place to reduce emissions."
"It's not St. Petersburg's emissions that is changing St. Petersburg's climate. It's a huge global problem that's changed everyone's climate."
attributing a single event to a big trend is actually very difficult."
Parson said it was akin to trying to figure out if a single home run hit by baseball great Barry Bonds can be attributed to Bonds' admitted use of steroids. But Bonds also hit home runs before he started taking performance-enhancing drugs.
- - -
In the end, Parson said, local leaders need to be heard on climate change. But he admitted that their ability to mitigate its effects is extremely limited.
"It's a shame, local government has to be a partner in adaptation," he said, "but local government is not the sensible or ideal place to reduce emissions."
"It's not St. Petersburg's emissions that is changing St. Petersburg's climate. It's a huge global problem that's changed everyone's climate."
Times senior news researcher Caryn Baird contributed to this report. Contact Charlie Frago at cfrago@tampabay.com or (727)893-8459. Follow@CharlieFrago.




Climate scientists have warned for years that a warming planet would cause more extreme storms, like the one that walloped Texas in February, knocking out power and leaving millions in a deep freeze.
Yet as the snow fell and the wind howled, some looked for other explanations for the storm and its resulting power outages. The conservative website The Gateway Pundit made the false claim that President Joe Biden's energy policies somehow prevented Texas plants from generating the power the state needed and "led to Texans literally freezing to death."
The next day, the conspiracy theory website Infowars published a similarly untrue story that was shared 70,000 times on Facebook and Twitter. Four days later, U.S. Rep. Lauren Boebert, R-Colorado, tweeted to her 100,000 followers that Biden's energy policies were "leaving millions of Texans freezing to death."
All those claims were false. In fact, an emergency request granted by the Biden administration gave the state authority to exceed federal environmental limits in order to provide enough power to Texans.
To climate scientists and misinformation researchers, claims like these mark an important shift: Instead of focusing on denialism, climate misinformation is getting local, focused on extreme weather events tied to a changing climate - such the Texas storm or recent wildfires that ravaged California and Australia.
"It just isn't credible to deny climate change or the impacts it's having. People see it with their own two eyes," said Penn State University climate scientist Michael Mann. "So there's a shift in tactics. Now it's softer forms of denial, and efforts to diminish the impacts of climate change."
That evolution is evident online. Media intelligence firm Zignal Labs analyzed millions of social media posts, news stories and other online content and found that overall, conversations about climate change in the past 12 months peaked during high-profile natural disasters, including the Texas storm and the California wildfires. Overall, online mentions of natural disasters and their relationship to climate change also increased by 27 percent, Zignal found.
Surveys also show that extreme weather is changing people's thinking about climate change. According to a 2019 poll by The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research and the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago, nearly 75 percent of Americans said their opinions about climate change have been influenced by extreme weather in the previous five years.
With about 7 in 10 Americans saying they believe climate change is happening, misinformation has now shifted from denialism to focus on its real world impacts. In some ways, that's a positive, as it demonstrates increased public understanding of the problem. But it also creates new opportunities for those who would spread bogus claims.
"We still see claims that global warming doesn't exist, but we also see misinformation about specific areas - such as the wind turbines in Texas," said Emmanuel Vincent, director of Science Feedback, a global network of scientists based in France who work to debunk inaccurate claims about climate change. "A lot of the misinformation is more subtle."
Those who still dispute a connection to a changing climate are grasping for increasingly far-fetched explanations. Following the Texas storm, for instance, some claimed the snow was fake and wouldn't burn, or that it was the result of weather control technology used by Biden. Recent California wildfires? While experts say dry and hot conditions are to blame, some, including U.S. Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, R-Georgia, have speculated it might be the work of space lasers.
Such misinformation persists online, despite stated attempts by online platforms to stamp it out. While Facebook, Twitter and YouTube have all removed content spreading misinformation about COVID-19 or the recent U.S. election, critics say they've been less aggressive when it comes to climate information.
A spokesman for Facebook said the platform is doing more than ever to connect users with accurate information about climate change. Its Climate Science Information Center, created last year, is now available in 16 countries and nine languages, and has a new section dedicated to dispelling climate change myths.
YouTube, owned by Google, was singled out as a leading source for climate misinformation by the U.S. House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis. In a letter to Google, the committee urged the tech giant to do more to combat falsehoods on its platforms.
In an emailed statement, YouTube acknowledged the challenge of "drawing the lines between misinformation, political speech, legitimate debate, and opinion."
U.S. Rep. Kathy Castor, D-Florida, chairwoman of the House climate committee, told the AP in a statement that groups who oppose meaningful responses to climate change - including fossil fuel companies - use misinformation to confuse the public. But she said many people aren't buying it.
"It's becoming harder for polluters and their allies to keep standing in the way of climate solutions, which is why they resort to false and harmful misinformation," she said.
"Most Americans, and particularly young Americans, are demanding their representatives take this crisis seriously."

What the Panhandle's top emergency officials learned from Michael
'We're not going to give up.' What a school superintendent learned from Michael
What Tampa Bay school leaders fear most from a storm
Tampa Bay's top cops fear for those who stay behind
of climate solutions, which is why they resort to false and harmful misinformation," she said.
"Most Americans, and particularly young Americans, are demanding their representatives take this crisis seriously."




As the Florida Legislature begins to reconvene in Tallahassee to prepare for the upcoming January session, we need our senators and representatives to maintain their focus on resilience and to continue to make advancements that address the biggest existential threat of a generation: climate change. By building on the gains made in the last session, we can produce durable results that will protect our Floridian coastal ecosystems, as well as our blue economy that is driven by a healthy ocean.
Floridians from all walks of life can attest that our ocean and coasts are under assault from a warming, rising sea, and we can see that the threats are growing. Warm water exacerbates hurricanes, Red Tides, blue green algal events and fish kills. The changing climate alters animal behavior and makes fish migration patterns volatile. Rising seas pour water onto our streets, compromise our aging septic systems, inundate stormwater systems and flush saltwater into our fresh groundwater supplies. The threats to natural and human systems are seemingly ever-present, and to us Floridians they are becoming more apparent all the time.
Last session, under the leadership of House Speaker Chris Sprowls, R-Palm Harbor, and Senate President Wilton Simpson, R-Trilby, the Legislature took some of the most meaningful steps in Florida history to making an impact on climate resilience.
SB 1954 created and funded the Resilient Florida Grant Program, directed the creation of a Statewide Flooding and Sea Level Rise Resilience Plan and, notably, created the Florida Flood Hub for Applied Research and Innovation at the University of South Florida College of Marine Science. The creation of the Flood Hub is a laudable achievement and will provide a quintessentially important clearinghouse of information and data on the impacts that the rising sea will have on our state - the modeling that will be produced by the Flood Hub will be invaluable for forecasting floods, floodplain inundation mapping , and assessing economic damage. With the former Chief Science Officer of Florida Tom Frazer at the helm at the College of Marine Science, the Flood Hub is certain to be a resilience science powerhouse.
As Speaker Sprowls enters the last year of his leadership term, I am looking forward to working with him and I encourage him to double down on his important efforts on resilience and flooding, and to continue to pave the way for Florida to be a leader on climate issues.
This can and should include enhancement and perpetuation of the resilience and adaptation components Sprowls has underscored, but it should also be expanded to include mitigation components - there are bold actions that Florida can pioneer that will alleviate a warming ocean and climate, and there is an appetite among Floridians to take these challenges head on. Investments in blue carbon projects, which could include seagrass restoration and protection for example, could help sequester carbon that is contributing to the warming climate while also protecting critical habitat for iconic Floridian species such as manatees that have suffered tragic losses over the past year due to compromised water quality and warming waters.
Making investments in protecting our blue economy now will pay dividends long into the future, and we encourage the Legislature to build a bold legacy for itself and for Florida's ocean environment.
Jon Paul "J.P." Brooker is an attorney and serves as Ocean Conservancy's director of Florida Conservation. He is a sixth generation Floridian born and raised on the Indian River Lagoon in Brevard County.
on components - there are bold actions that Florida can pioneer that will alleviate a warming ocean and climate, and there is an appetite among Floridians to take these challenges head on. Investments in blue carbon projects, which could include seagrass restoration and protection for example, could help sequester carbon that is contributing to the warming climate while also protecting critical habitat for iconic Floridian species such as manatees that have suffered tragic losses over the past year due to compromised water quality and warming waters.
Making investments in protecting our blue economy now will pay dividends long into the future, and we encourage the Legislature to build a bold legacy for itself and for Florida's ocean environment.




President Donald Trump's reelection campaign has a plan to talk about the environment with Florida voters: address the problems you see, not the causes you don't.
It's been a winning strategy for Republicans in Florida for over a decade. The basic tactic is to address specific, pressing policy challenges facing Florida communities   algal blooms, coastal flooding, threats to the Everglades   without discussing the climatal forces driving change. But environmental politics in Florida have shifted since Trump's first run for the presidency in 2016, when his skepticism over the extent and causes of climate change proved immaterial in his path to electoral victory there.
 Republicans in Florida who as recently as last year ran successful campaigns void of any mention of climate change now acknowledge the phenomenon as a threat. Gov. Ron DeSantis and Sen. Rick Scott both featured ads in their campaigns expressing general commitment to serve as stewards of the environment without attributing problems facing the state to a warming Earth. Then this year, they characterized climate change as "real" requiring increased resiliency efforts and concrete solutions.
 RELATED COVERAGE: Is Ron DeSantis Florida's environmental governor?
 The Trump campaign has not followed their lead, still hoping it can rely on the old playbook on environment politics without adding to his electoral risk.
 Campaign officials tell McClatchy that Trump is committed to reducing carbon dioxide emissions   seemingly an acknowledgment of the need to roll back the use of fossil fuels   while casting doubt on the science undergirding alarming national climate assessments.
 "The president's policies of competition and innovation have already produced significant carbon emission declines here in the United States while also kicking off an energy revolution," said Sarah Matthews, deputy press secretary for the Trump campaign, responding to the Miami Herald's announcement of the creation of the Florida Climate Reporting Network, which also includes the Tampa Bay Times.
 "He doesn't want to intentionally inflict harm on our own economy and limit our freedoms with something like a $93 trillion Green New Deal when other countries like China and India won't do the same," she said.
 READ MORE: Florida newsrooms band together to cover the effects of climate change
 Federal reports on annual emissions figures are not published until the end of each calendar year. But campaign and administration officials are pointing to forecasts released last month by the Energy Information Administration that estimate a 2% drop in U.S. carbon dioxide emissions in 2019 and a 0.9% drop in 2020.
 The numbers provide Trump's campaign with an argument that "unleashing American energy," in the form of deregulation, does not necessarily lead to increasing emissions   while it simultaneously casts doubt on the importance of reducing emissions in the first place.
 "The climate has been changing for tens of thousands of years. Let's not forget that we were recently warned of global warming and before that we were supposedly headed for a new ice age," Matthews said. "The president will continue to advance realistic solutions to reduce emissions while ensuring reliable, affordable, and plentiful energy."
 Environmental groups continue to characterize Trump as a villain on climate policy, inextricably tied to the fossil fuel industry and untethered from science.
 "There's nothing new about Trump falsely trying to take credit for the work of others, or about him being content with letting Florida slip into the sea if it will profit oil and gas CEOs a few bucks," said Ariel Hayes, national political director for the Sierra Club. "And let's not forget that Trump is the reason so many Floridians live in fear of their coasts being opened up to offshore drilling. Trump's climate denial is a threat to all Floridians, and the only surefire way to turn things around is to make sure we have a different president in 2020."
 The Trump administration remains divided over climate policy. Several senior White House aides take the warnings from scientists seriously and worry over the political costs of airing skepticism, according to three administration officials. Still, the West Wing roundly supports Trump's decision to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate agreement   a "bad deal," in Trump's words, that does not sufficiently address rising carbon emissions on a level playing field.
 Still others   including the president himself   continue to question whether climate change is a serious or imminent threat.
 "The United States government takes seriously the issue of climate change, and it is important that policies and decision-making be based on transparent and defensible science," a senior administration official said.
 Congressional Republicans have begun to discuss the threat of climate change more openly than in prior sessions, including Rep. Matt Gaetz of Florida, a conservative congressman from the panhandle and an ally of the White House, who in April proposed a "Green Real Deal" alternative to the Democrats' plan that characterizes climate change as a threat to national security. Gaetz, along with Florida Reps. Francis Rooney, Brian Mast and Bill Posey, is also a member of the House Climate Solutions Caucus.
 But within Florida Republican circles, the question is whether climate policy has risen to a level of concern such that it could threaten the standing of skeptical politicians among voters. That debate has made its way to at least some Trump campaign aides.
 Climate "has supplanted crime and education, which for years have been issues one and two in public opinion surveys," one GOP operative in Florida advising Trump's reelection campaign told McClatchy, on the condition of anonymity to speak candidly. "What we don't know yet is whether its a mover that can make people vote. But climate deniers do not live in Florida."
 A Quinnipiac poll published in March found that 72 percent of Florida voters are "very concerned" or "somewhat concerned" about climate change, and that 66 percent are "very concerned" or "somewhat concerned" that they or a member of their family "will be personally affected by climate change."
 Still, state environmental regulators being banned from using the phrases "climate change" and "global warming" under the Scott administration didn't prevent the former governor from winning his U.S. Senate race in November amid toxic algae blooms that touched both coasts and fouled tributaries running through Republican strongholds. Nor did former Miami Rep. Carlos Curbelo's advocacy for a carbon tax save him in a competitive swing district.
 Miami has already been something of a model for how to campaign on climate change in moderate and conservative communities without actually talking about it.
 Two years ago, when Miami's city government was selling voters on a $400 million general obligation bond   nearly half of which was dedicated to sea-rise projects   the city's Republican mayor, Tomás Regalado, pitched the project to voters in conservative Cuban enclaves as a fix to their flooding problems. As he stumped on Spanish-language TV and radio, he largely left climate change and sea rise out of his vernacular.
 That's not because Regalado is a climate denier. Back when Trump was seeking the Republican nomination for president, the mayor posed a question about climate change during a Miami debate on CNN. In September 2017, when Hurricane Irma was bearing down on South Florida, he called on Trump to talk about climate issues, saying, "if this isn't climate change, I don't know what is."
 But unlike Miami Beach   where a liberal voting base is all in on climate change   Regalado knows that the elderly, conservative voters who tend to dominate Miami's off-year, low-turnout elections are both notoriously averse to tax hikes and less concerned or attuned to the long-term consequences of climate change than other parts of South Florida.
 The bond issue failed to gain 50 percent support in the predominantly Cuban communities around Regalado's own home, but received enough support there that it passed due to other parts of Miami.
 Regalado believes that Hurricane Irma, which badly flooded some parts of the city, ultimately helped draw support for the bond issue. But he's not sure that some of his neighbors have caught on to the idea of climate change as an existential threat.
 "I can tell you that one of the first things that pop up in a conversation is 'My street is flooding. It's horrible to drive'," he said. "But whether they consider that climate change or anything that's coming down 100 years from now, it doesn't seem that's the conversation."
 Cuban-Americans have been a key constituency for Trump in South Florida. The demographic proved crucial for DeSantis, a Trump ally, in November when he won a historically tight race for Florida governor. -- This report was written by McClatchy White House correspondent Michael Wilner and Miami Herald staff writer David Smiley. It was produced by the Florida Climate Reporting Network, a multi-newsroom initiative that includes the Miami Herald, the Sun-Sentinel, The Palm Beach Post, the Orlando Sentinel, WLRN Public Media and the Tampa Bay Times.
rive'," he said. "But whether they consider that climate change or anything that's coming down 100 years from now, it doesn't seem that's the conversation."
 Cuban-Americans have been a key constituency for Trump in South Florida. The demographic proved crucial for DeSantis, a Trump ally, in November when he won a historically tight race for Florida governor. -- This report was written by McClatchy White House correspondent Michael Wilner and Miami Herald staff writer David Smiley. It was produced by the Florida Climate Reporting Network, a multi-newsroom initiative that includes the Miami Herald, the Sun-Sentinel, The Palm Beach Post, the Orlando Sentinel, WLRN Public Media and the Tampa Bay Times.





A viral image circulating on social media ridicules the idea that climate change is to blame for a recent hurricane in Florida, noting the many hurricanes that have hit the Sunshine State over the better part of two centuries.
"Florida has had 119 hurricanes since 1850, but the last one was due to climate change," claims the image, which includes a picture of a monkey.
The image was shared in a Facebook post that was flagged as part of Facebook's efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Facebook.)
The post uses a sarcastic tone to mock what scientists say about climate change and hurricanes, but it mischaracterizes what is the consensus view among hurricane researchers. Their message is not that climate change caused recent hurricanes, but that there is evidence that it might have made them more serious.
The post also misstates the number of hurricanes. Brian McNoldy, senior research associate at the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, said there have been 140 hurricanes in Florida since 1850.
Vague reference in viral image
The Sept. 8 post was shared by conservative commentator James T. Harris, who has more than 537,000 followers on Facebook. But neither his post nor the viral image cites a particular hurricane.
The post came one day after President Joe Biden walked through a New York City neighborhood devastated by the remnants of Hurricane Ida, where he said, "the evidence is clear. Climate change poses an existential threat to our lives."
But the text in the image hascirculatedsince at least September 2017, when Hurricane Irma hit Florida, and some versions of the post insert the word "manmade" before "climate change."
Prior fact-checks
Here's what we found in a fact-check published Sept. 9,  and one from October 2020:
Studies of Atlantic storms since 1980 found that the hurricanes that form there tend to be stronger than in the past. Human-driven climate change might play a role, although the science is unsettled.
The number of hurricanes making landfall in the U.S. each year has not increased since a century ago, but researchers said it's likely that global warming will cause future hurricanes to be more intense.
We asked several hurricane researchers about the claim in the viral image; they agreed that climate change doesn't cause hurricanes, but could make them more severe.
"The way we think about climate change impact on extremes, including hurricanes" is that climate change from human activity "can modify their characteristics," said Suzana Camargo, a research professor at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University. For example, the most intense hurricanes occur more often, or the precipitation associated with particular hurricanes increases, she said.
As for climate change's effect specifically on Florida hurricanes, "it is hard to make the assessment on a specific region, as the sample size is small," she said.
Climate change is not the cause of hurricanes, because hurricanes occur naturally, said Kevin Trenberth, distinguished scholar at the National Center of Atmospheric Research. "But climate change alters the ocean and atmosphere environment to make them more active. This can and is manifested in several ways: more intensity, bigger, longer lasting, and perhaps more hurricanes."
Phil Klotzbach, research scientist in the Department of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University, said "we don't expect to see more hurricanes in the future due to climate change - in fact we actually see fewer - but the warmer water temperatures may lead to stronger storms in the future."
He added: "These trends may be hard to detect for many years to come, especially for landfalling hurricanes."
Our ruling
A viral image claimed: "Florida has had 119 hurricanes since 1850, but the last one was due to climate change."
The post uses a sarcastic tone to mock what scientists say about climate change and hurricanes, but it mischaracterizes their view.
Experts do not blame climate change for causing hurricanes, though they say it's a possible cause of making them more intense.
The post also misstates the number of hurricanes in Florida since 1850. It has had 140.
We rate the post False.





Failing to react and adapt to threats posed by climate change and extreme weather could seriously interrupt operations at the Department of Energy's many installations and could lead to "a significant loss of time and research," the agency warned in a plan recently made public by the White House.
Both the Energy Department's national defense and environmental cleanup portfolios are endangered by climate-change inaction, the 2021 Climate Adaptation and Resilience Plan suggests. So, it emphasizes, a proactive problem-solving approach is necessary.
"Even as we are full speed ahead in our efforts to slow climate change," Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm said in a statement Thursday, "its devastating effects are undoubtedly impacting our strategic mission."
Nuclear security work — on the atomic arsenal, for example — is "largely conducted at DOE sites that are vulnerable to extreme weather conditions and climate events," the report reads, and remediation efforts could be disrupted if facilities dedicated to processing radioactive wastes "are impacted by climate hazards or if groundwater remediation systems are impacted by droughts."
The department's specialized facilities require "significant water and energy resources," the 26-page road map continues, meaning shortages or natural disasters could dishevel its "particle accelerators, bio-refinery pilot plants, supercomputers, and waste processing facilities." The Energy Communities Alliance on Friday pointed out that climate change has long afflicted the sensitive sites under DOE watch: "Wildfires have caused millions of dollars of damages, power outages, and temporary shutdowns of sites at Los Alamos and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory," the coalition of governments noted in an update. "Extreme cold has damaged critical facilities at the National Nuclear Security Administration's Pantex plant in Texas."
But, the Energy Department noted in its package, a proven process to identify and respond to hazards is on the books; stringent rules, prerequisites and redundancies already guide construction of nuclear labs, plants and sites.
So far, 51% of Energy Department complexes have been screened for climate risks and their potential impacts. Facilities and operations critical to the DOE mission and national security, generally, will be prioritized moving forward.
"Sustaining DOE's mission in this changing environment is dependent on DOE's ability to successfully identify aspects of climate change likely to impact our mission and operations," the report states, "as well as our ability to respond strategically."
At the Savannah River Site, specifically, the Office of Environmental Management is shoring up defenses against scorching temperatures and raging storms spurred by a warming planet, and is working to modernize the electrical grid. At the Hanford Site in Washington, wildfire-tolerant vegetation has been planted and ice vests are used to combat heat stress among workers.
The DOE blueprint was one of more than 20 published this week, the result of an executive order from President Joe Biden. Officials have for months worked on the plans, which show how key government agencies will navigate the climate crisis and its short- and long-term consequences.
"DOE's operations must adapt to this changing environment to mirror the bold agenda that President Biden has set for America," Granholm said. "This first-of-its-kind plan shows our commitment to being a changemaker and tackling this existential threat."
The White House on Thursday said the array of plans reflect Biden's "whole-of-government approach to confronting the climate crisis." Taking holistic action now, the administration said, will minimize damage down the road.
combat heat stress among workers.
The DOE blueprint was one of more than 20 published this week, the result of an executive order from President Joe Biden. Officials have for months worked on the plans, which show how key government agencies will navigate the climate crisis and its short- and long-term consequences.
"DOE's operations must adapt to this changing environment to mirror the bold agenda that President Biden has set for America," Granholm said. "This first-of-its-kind plan shows our commitment to being a changemaker and tackling this existential threat."
The White House on Thursday said the array of plans reflect Biden's "whole-of-government approach to confronting the climate crisis." Taking holistic action now, the administration said, will minimize damage down the road.





As a member of Congress from Florida who used to work at the Pentagon, there is no shortage of national security threats that keep me up at night. China, Russia, North Korea, Iran, the failed state of Venezuela, nuclear weapons, and terrorism all disturb peaceful slumber.
But the most pressing global challenges I see are pandemic disease and climate change. While they may not be considered "national security threats" in the narrowest sense of the term, they pose a clear and present danger to the American people.
Neither threat can be effectively addressed by the United States alone, instead requiring cooperation among countries. Each has the capacity to upend American society in ways the Chinese Communist Party, Vladimir Putin, Kim Jong Un, authorities in Tehran, Nicolás Maduro and leaders of the Islamic State and al-Qaida could imagine only in their darkest dreams.
In the case of pandemic disease, COVID-19 has taken more American lives - 293,000 and counting - than were lost on the combined battlefields of World War I, Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq. Virus-related deaths in this country have even surpassed the 290,000 U.S. combat deaths during World War II. Even as we make progress to develop and distribute a vaccine, we recognize that a pathogen that emerged from China has fundamentally changed life in America for the foreseeable future.
The dangers of climate change - the warming of the atmosphere due mainly to human activity like burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels- may not be as clear-cut as a nuclear explosion in an American city or the death of COVID patients in an American hospital. But the science is conclusive - climate change imperils our country, our citizens and our civilization.
No American state has more to lose from inaction on climate change than Florida, and no state will benefit more from smart and swift action to combat the threat. The Sunshine State is uniquely vulnerable to the consequences of climate change due to its geography and topography.
For instance, Florida is the most hurricane-prone state, and there is compelling evidence that climate change is causing storms to form more frequently, to be more intense and to occur outside of official hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to November 30. The 2020 season was the busiest on record, and I've urged the federal government to lengthen the season to better capture the increase in activity.
Climate change poses other severe risks to Florida. It causes rising sea levels that erode beaches, produce flooding and threaten coastal properties. It compromises the quantity and quality of our drinking water. It damages the Everglades, our coral reefs, and our marine life. It harms commercial fishermen and recreational anglers. It leads to hotter and more humid temperatures, a hazard to human health. It jeopardizes tourism. In short, climate change endangers virtually every aspect of what might be called the "Florida way of life."
It's not too late to act, but time is of the essence. We must cut greenhouse emissions by modernizing how we generate electricity, power our cars and public transport systems, grow fruits and vegetables, and light and cool our homes and businesses. We must reduce our vulnerability to the effects of climate change, building resilient infrastructure to weather the next storm.
A whole-of-society approach is required, with roles for government, the business community, and conscientious citizens. At the federal level, the Biden administration will rejoin the Paris climate agreement and take other steps to attack the problem, but bipartisan action by Congress is critical.
Florida's congressional delegation should be at the forefront of this fight, given how much is at stake for our beloved state. If our two Republican senators are as strong on national security as they profess to be, they'll need to step up - and speak out against the climate change deniers in their party.
Climate change is an existential threat for Florida, but it's also an opportunity to be seized. There's no reason our state cannot lead the nation, and the world, when it comes to creating green jobs that pay well and do good. We can out-compete China, rebuild our economy in the wake of the pandemic, and - in the process - save the only planet we have.
Stephanie Murphy, a Democrat, represents an District 17, an Orlando-area district, in the U.S. House of Representatives. She formerly served as a national security specialist at the Department of Defense.
t and take other steps to attack the problem, but bipartisan action by Congress is critical.
Florida's congressional delegation should be at the forefront of this fight, given how much is at stake for our beloved state. If our two Republican senators are as strong on national security as they profess to be, they'll need to step up - and speak out against the climate change deniers in their party.
Climate change is an existential threat for Florida, but it's also an opportunity to be seized. There's no reason our state cannot lead the nation, and the world, when it comes to creating green jobs that pay well and do good. We can out-compete China, rebuild our economy in the wake of the pandemic, and - in the process - save the only planet we have.
Stephanie Murphy, a Democrat, represents an District 17, an Orlando-area district, in the U.S. House of Representatives. She formerly served as a national security specialist at the Department of Defense.




As a member of Congress from Florida who used to work at the Pentagon, there is no shortage of national security threats that keep me up at night. China, Russia, North Korea, Iran, the failed state of Venezuela, nuclear weapons, and terrorism all disturb peaceful slumber.
But the most pressing global challenges I see are pandemic disease and climate change. While they may not be considered "national security threats" in the narrowest sense of the term, they pose a clear and present danger to the American people.
Neither threat can be effectively addressed by the United States alone, instead requiring cooperation among countries. Each has the capacity to upend American society in ways the Chinese Communist Party, Vladimir Putin, Kim Jong Un, authorities in Tehran, Nicolás Maduro and leaders of the Islamic State and al-Qaida could imagine only in their darkest dreams.
In the case of pandemic disease, COVID-19 has taken more American lives - 293,000 and counting - than were lost on the combined battlefields of World War I, Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq. Virus-related deaths in this country have even surpassed the 290,000 U.S. combat deaths during World War II. Even as we make progress to develop and distribute a vaccine, we recognize that a pathogen that emerged from China has fundamentally changed life in America for the foreseeable future.
The dangers of climate change - the warming of the atmosphere due mainly to human activity like burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels- may not be as clear-cut as a nuclear explosion in an American city or the death of COVID patients in an American hospital. But the science is conclusive - climate change imperils our country, our citizens and our civilization.
No American state has more to lose from inaction on climate change than Florida, and no state will benefit more from smart and swift action to combat the threat. The Sunshine State is uniquely vulnerable to the consequences of climate change due to its geography and topography.
For instance, Florida is the most hurricane-prone state, and there is compelling evidence that climate change is causing storms to form more frequently, to be more intense and to occur outside of official hurricane season, which runs from June 1 to November 30. The 2020 season was the busiest on record, and I've urged the federal government to lengthen the season to better capture the increase in activity.
Climate change poses other severe risks to Florida. It causes rising sea levels that erode beaches, produce flooding and threaten coastal properties. It compromises the quantity and quality of our drinking water. It damages the Everglades, our coral reefs, and our marine life. It harms commercial fishermen and recreational anglers. It leads to hotter and more humid temperatures, a hazard to human health. It jeopardizes tourism. In short, climate change endangers virtually every aspect of what might be called the "Florida way of life."
It's not too late to act, but time is of the essence. We must cut greenhouse emissions by modernizing how we generate electricity, power our cars and public transport systems, grow fruits and vegetables, and light and cool our homes and businesses. We must reduce our vulnerability to the effects of climate change, building resilient infrastructure to weather the next storm.
A whole-of-society approach is required, with roles for government, the business community, and conscientious citizens. At the federal level, the Biden administration will rejoin the Paris climate agreement and take other steps to attack the problem, but bipartisan action by Congress is critical.
Florida's congressional delegation should be at the forefront of this fight, given how much is at stake for our beloved state. If our two Republican senators are as strong on national security as they profess to be, they'll need to step up - and speak out against the climate change deniers in their party.
Climate change is an existential threat for Florida, but it's also an opportunity to be seized. There's no reason our state cannot lead the nation, and the world, when it comes to creating green jobs that pay well and do good. We can out-compete China, rebuild our economy in the wake of the pandemic, and - in the process - save the only planet we have.
Stephanie Murphy, a Democrat, represents an District 17, an Orlando-area district, in the U.S. House of Representatives. She formerly served as a national security specialist at the Department of Defense.
t and take other steps to attack the problem, but bipartisan action by Congress is critical.
Florida's congressional delegation should be at the forefront of this fight, given how much is at stake for our beloved state. If our two Republican senators are as strong on national security as they profess to be, they'll need to step up - and speak out against the climate change deniers in their party.
Climate change is an existential threat for Florida, but it's also an opportunity to be seized. There's no reason our state cannot lead the nation, and the world, when it comes to creating green jobs that pay well and do good. We can out-compete China, rebuild our economy in the wake of the pandemic, and - in the process - save the only planet we have.
Stephanie Murphy, a Democrat, represents an District 17, an Orlando-area district, in the U.S. House of Representatives. She formerly served as a national security specialist at the Department of Defense.



Too often, lovers of liberty, this one included, respond to claims like "X is bad and it's occurring more frequently so we need more government" with "X isn't occurring or it is actually good from another perspective." We need to remember to follow through by explaining that even if bad X occurs, government is probably the cause, not the cure. We got 99 problems, and as I explained to protestors in Charleston in summer 2020, the government directly causes or exacerbates all of them.
But let's just consider what many progressives rank as two of our biggest problems, systemic racism and global climate change. (You might recall that WaPo considers them inextricably intertwined.) Instead of pointing out that people of all skin complexions still flock to this country and that the media exaggerates speculative climate models, I'll stipulate that both exist and that both are bad (racism definitely is, but climate change might not be).
So how do we thwart this two-headed nuisance? How about striking at the root? That is reasonable, right? Make sure that we kill the entire weed so it won't readily grow back? 
What, then, is at the root of systemic racism and global climate change? Governments! If we defunded governments by half, both problems would fall off the radar, as would many other problems, from the morbidly obese national debt to runaway tuition and medical expenses.
Fact is, were it not for New Deal meddling in electricity development and high regulatory barriers for nuclear energy generation, America might already be at net zero carbon. The former effectively stopped the development of green distributed energy markets and technologies and the latter greatly slowed Gen IV fission reactors and fusion energy technologies, i.e., clean, safe, and cheap energy without any of the downsides of wind and solar. Thanks Uncle Sam!
And of course it is well established that Uncle Sam and other American governments are racist in effect, if not intent. Drug laws create a new Jim Crow system of segregation, municipal governments prey on the poor for fines and fees, unnecessary occupational licensing laws keep the disadvantaged out of a variety of good jobs, and Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates disproportionately hurt people of color. Worst of all, perhaps, government financial regulations prevent members of some communities from engaging in the forms of self-help that created pathways that enabled members of earlier groups of hyphenated-Americans, including immigrants and religious minorities, to fully join what used to be called the American Dream.
I argued last year that those who want to defund the police are onto something, they just want to go too fast given that people in America's urban centers haven't self-policed for over a century. But they did before the Civil War and Americans still self-police in many rural areas, despite the popularity of Walt Longmire and Raylan Givens. 
Self-policing requires strong Second Amendment protections, like Constitutional Carry, but no self-styled progressive wants "people of color" living in urban areas to be able to defend themselves. So only overworked cops and violent criminals carry guns, with predictable results. 
America is a "democracy" so don't Americans get the laws they want? Ha! Americans elect government officials kinda sorta but is there really a choice between Tweedledum and Tweedledumber?
America's political system has devolved to the point that voters regularly choose people who can't keep their libidos in check, who invade distant nations based on lies and then lie some more about why America must keep troops there, who fuel massive booms then bail out the corporations that got rich during the bubble, who label major reform bills the opposite of what they do, and who upend decades of established tariff policies by starting a trade war with a major creditor and trading partner. 
And now the Biden administration makes us pine for them all! One, hopefully, does not have to be a National Review conservative to concede its claim that most Biden economic policies do not make rational sense. Biden recently claimed that Americans will pay $x trillion so the policy doesn't really cost anything. Really? From trickle down economics to Freakonomics to moronomics in one lifetime! (The saner claim that $x trillions won't add to the national debt at least could be true, but isn't.)
Although there is a good economic case for open immigration, the Biden administration hasn't made it. I can't imagine how its darker-skinned constituents feel about its open border policy. How does allowing millions of newcomers into the country help to achieve "equity" for those born in America? Isn't the most likely outcome a political backlash and higher unemployment? Maybe conservative pundits like Tucker Carlson are right about the open border being a cynical ploy for votes, hence the ongoing destruction of the secret ballot and voter ID laws.
One can approach the issue of government culpability in America's problems from the other way, too, by asking what good has government ever done? Is there a single good or service that it provides better than the private sector? 
Education? Ha! Members of Congress are four times more likely to send their children to private schools than the average American family is for a reason.
Healthcare? Have you heard about the Indian Health Service? The VA?
Infrastructure? Nope! Private prevails.
Affordable housing? If you believe that, I have a (segregated) federal housing project to sell you. It will be cheap, but not inexpensive. 
Redistributing income? Actually, insurers and nonprofits are much more efficient at directing funds to where they are most needed. Politicians often send resources to where they will return the most votes, not to where they will do the most good.
Military protection? Maybe, but only with privately produced weapons and other kit.
Wasting other people's money? Ya got me there, but that is actually a bad, not a good.
Instead of asking "What can the government do to fix this problem?" Americans should ask "How did the government screw this up too, and how can we restore efficient market solutions?" The world will never be completely free of bigotry, bad weather, and 97 other problems but at least taxpayers can stop paying through the nose to make them worse.
 more efficient at directing funds to where they are most needed. Politicians often send resources to where they will return the most votes, not to where they will do the most good.
Military protection? Maybe, but only with privately produced weapons and other kit.
Wasting other people's money? Ya got me there, but that is actually a bad, not a good.
Instead of asking "What can the government do to fix this problem?" Americans should ask "How did the government screw this up too, and how can we restore efficient market solutions?" The world will never be completely free of bigotry, bad weather, and 97 other problems but at least taxpayers can stop paying through the nose to make them worse.




The deadly heat wave that roasted the Pacific Northwest and western Canada was virtually impossible without human-caused climate change that added a few extra degrees to the record-smashing temperatures, a new quick scientific analysis found.
An international team of 27 scientists calculated that climate change increased chances of the extreme heat occurring by at least 150 times, but likely much more. 
The study, not yet peer reviewed, said that before the industrial era, the region's late June triple-digit heat was the type that would not have happened in human civilization. And even in today's warming world, it said, the heat was a once-in-a-millennium event.
But that once-in-a-millennium event would likely occur every five to 10 years once the world warms another 1.4 degrees (0.8 degrees Celsius), said Wednesday's study from World Weather Attribution. That much warming could be 40 or 50 years away if carbon pollution continues at its current pace, one study author said.
This type of extreme heat "would go from essentially virtually impossible to relatively commonplace," said study co-author Gabriel Vecchi, a Princeton University climate scientist. "That is a huge change."
The study also found that in the Pacific Northwest and Canada climate change was responsible for about 3.6 degrees (2 degrees Celsius) of the heat shock. Those few degrees make a big difference in human health, said study co-author Kristie Ebi, a professor at the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the University of Washington.
"This study is telling us climate change is killing people," said Ebi, who endured the blistering heat in Seattle. She said it will be many months before a death toll can be calculated from June's blast of heat but it's likely to be hundreds or thousands. "Heat is the No. 1 weather-related killer of Americans."
In Oregon alone, the state medical examiner on Wednesday reported 116 deaths related to the heat wave. 
The team of scientists used a well-established and credible method to search for climate change's role in extreme weather, according to the National Academy of Sciences. They logged observations of what happened and fed them into 21 computer models and ran numerous simulations. They then simulated a world without greenhouse gases from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. The difference between the two scenarios is the climate change portion. 
"Without climate change this event would not have happened," said study senior author Friederike Otto, a climate scientist at the University of Oxford.
What made the Northwest heat wave so remarkable is how much hotter it was than old records and what climate models had predicted. Scientists say this hints that some kind of larger climate shift could be in play - and in places that they didn't expect.
"Everybody is really worried about the implications of this event," said study co-author Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, a Dutch climate scientist. "This is something that nobody saw coming, that nobody thought possible. And we feel that we do not understand heat waves as well as we thought we did. The big question for many people is: Could this also happen in a lot of places?"
The World Weather Attribution team does these quick analyses, which later get published in peer-reviewed journals. In the past, they have found similar large climate change effects in many heat waves, including ones in Europe and Siberia. But sometimes the team finds climate change wasn't a factor, as they did in a Brazilian drought  and a heat wave in India.
Six outside scientists said the quick study made sense and probably underestimated the extent of climate change's role in the heat wave. 
That's because climate models used in the simulations usually underestimate how climate change alters the jet stream that parks "heat domes" over regions and causes some heat waves, said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann. 
The models also underestimate how dry soil worsens heat because there is less water to evaporate, which feeds a vicious cycle of drought, said Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA and the Nature Conservancy.
The study hit home for University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver, who wasn't part of the research team.
"Victoria, which is known for its mild climate, felt more like Death Valley last week," Weaver said. "I've been in a lot of hot places in the world, and this was the worst I've ever been in.
"But you ain't seen nothing yet," he added. "It's going to get a lot worse."
 India.
Six outside scientists said the quick study made sense and probably underestimated the extent of climate change's role in the heat wave. 
That's because climate models used in the simulations usually underestimate how climate change alters the jet stream that parks "heat domes" over regions and causes some heat waves, said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann. 
The models also underestimate how dry soil worsens heat because there is less water to evaporate, which feeds a vicious cycle of drought, said Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA and the Nature Conservancy.
The study hit home for University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver, who wasn't part of the research team.
"Victoria, which is known for its mild climate, felt more like Death Valley last week," Weaver said. "I've been in a lot of hot places in the world, and this was the worst I've ever been in.
"But you ain't seen nothing yet," he added. "It's going to get a lot worse."




The deadly heat wave that roasted the Pacific Northwest and western Canada was virtually impossible without human-caused climate change that added a few extra degrees to the record-smashing temperatures, a new quick scientific analysis found.
An international team of 27 scientists calculated that climate change increased chances of the extreme heat occurring by at least 150 times, but likely much more. 
The study, not yet peer reviewed, said that before the industrial era, the region's late June triple-digit heat was the type that would not have happened in human civilization. And even in today's warming world, it said, the heat was a once-in-a-millennium event.
But that once-in-a-millennium event would likely occur every five to 10 years once the world warms another 1.4 degrees (0.8 degrees Celsius), said Wednesday's study from World Weather Attribution. That much warming could be 40 or 50 years away if carbon pollution continues at its current pace, one study author said.
This type of extreme heat "would go from essentially virtually impossible to relatively commonplace," said study co-author Gabriel Vecchi, a Princeton University climate scientist. "That is a huge change."
The study also found that in the Pacific Northwest and Canada climate change was responsible for about 3.6 degrees (2 degrees Celsius) of the heat shock. Those few degrees make a big difference in human health, said study co-author Kristie Ebi, a professor at the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the University of Washington.
"This study is telling us climate change is killing people," said Ebi, who endured the blistering heat in Seattle. She said it will be many months before a death toll can be calculated from June's blast of heat but it's likely to be hundreds or thousands. "Heat is the No. 1 weather-related killer of Americans."
In Oregon alone, the state medical examiner on Wednesday reported 116 deaths related to the heat wave. 
The team of scientists used a well-established and credible method to search for climate change's role in extreme weather, according to the National Academy of Sciences. They logged observations of what happened and fed them into 21 computer models and ran numerous simulations. They then simulated a world without greenhouse gases from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. The difference between the two scenarios is the climate change portion. 
"Without climate change this event would not have happened," said study senior author Friederike Otto, a climate scientist at the University of Oxford.
What made the Northwest heat wave so remarkable is how much hotter it was than old records and what climate models had predicted. Scientists say this hints that some kind of larger climate shift could be in play - and in places that they didn't expect.
"Everybody is really worried about the implications of this event," said study co-author Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, a Dutch climate scientist. "This is something that nobody saw coming, that nobody thought possible. And we feel that we do not understand heat waves as well as we thought we did. The big question for many people is: Could this also happen in a lot of places?"
The World Weather Attribution team does these quick analyses, which later get published in peer-reviewed journals. In the past, they have found similar large climate change effects in many heat waves, including ones in Europe and Siberia. But sometimes the team finds climate change wasn't a factor, as they did in a Brazilian drought  and a heat wave in India.
Six outside scientists said the quick study made sense and probably underestimated the extent of climate change's role in the heat wave. 
That's because climate models used in the simulations usually underestimate how climate change alters the jet stream that parks "heat domes" over regions and causes some heat waves, said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann. 
The models also underestimate how dry soil worsens heat because there is less water to evaporate, which feeds a vicious cycle of drought, said Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA and the Nature Conservancy.
The study hit home for University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver, who wasn't part of the research team.
"Victoria, which is known for its mild climate, felt more like Death Valley last week," Weaver said. "I've been in a lot of hot places in the world, and this was the worst I've ever been in.
"But you ain't seen nothing yet," he added. "It's going to get a lot worse."
 India.
Six outside scientists said the quick study made sense and probably underestimated the extent of climate change's role in the heat wave. 
That's because climate models used in the simulations usually underestimate how climate change alters the jet stream that parks "heat domes" over regions and causes some heat waves, said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann. 
The models also underestimate how dry soil worsens heat because there is less water to evaporate, which feeds a vicious cycle of drought, said Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA and the Nature Conservancy.
The study hit home for University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver, who wasn't part of the research team.
"Victoria, which is known for its mild climate, felt more like Death Valley last week," Weaver said. "I've been in a lot of hot places in the world, and this was the worst I've ever been in.
"But you ain't seen nothing yet," he added. "It's going to get a lot worse."




An Earth scientist's recent article making the rounds on social media highlights a terrifying conversation he had with "a very senior member" of the IPCC, which is the UN's body devoted to studying climate science. The upshot of their conversation was that millions of people will die from climate change, a conclusion that leads the author to lament that humans have created a consumption-driven civilization that is "hell-bent on destroying itself."
As with most such alarmist rhetoric, there is little to document these sweeping claims-even if we restrict ourselves to "official" sources of information, including the IPCC reports themselves. The historical record does not justify panic, but instead should lead us to expect continued progress for humanity, so long as the normal operation of voluntary market interactions continues without significant political interference to sabotage it.
The Conversation
Here is the opening hook from James Dyke's article, in which he grabs the reader with an apocalyptic conversation:
It was the spring of 2011, and I had managed to corner a very senior member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) during a coffee break at a workshop...
The IPCC reviews the vast amounts of science being generated around climate change and produces assessment reports every four years. Given the impact the IPPC's findings can have on policy and industry, great care is made to carefully present and communicate its scientific findings. So I wasn't expecting much when I straight out asked him how much warming he thought we were going to achieve before we manage to make the required cuts to greenhouse gas emissions.
"Oh, I think we're heading towards 3°C at least," he said.

"But what about the many millions of people directly threatened," I went on. "Those living in low-lying nations, the farmers affected by abrupt changes in weather, kids exposed to new diseases?"
He gave a sigh, paused for a few seconds, and a sad, resigned smile crept over his face. He then simply said: "They will die."
Putting aside the creepiness of someone smiling as he predicts millions of deaths-sort of like a James Bond villain-we must inquire: How plausible are these warnings? Does the climate change literature actually support such bold projections?
As it turns out, the answer is "no." It is certainly true that there are many particular dangers regarding climate change, which could have deleterious consequences on human welfare (broadly defined). But in order to conclude that millions-or even billions, as the author of the article states in his concluding remarks-of deaths hang in the balance, we have to grossly exaggerate all of the various mechanisms and scenarios, and we have to assume that humans do nothing to adapt to the changing circumstances over the course of decades.
In reality, it is much more likely that humans will adapt to whatever changes the climate brings them in the coming decades, and that various measures of human well-being-including not just GDP but also life expectancy and declining mortality rates from various ailments-will continue to improve. The voluntary market economy is an excellent general-purpose solution to the challenges facing humanity, including the handling of whatever curveballs climate change might throw.
IPCC's Summary of Climate Change Damages
Unfortunately, it is difficult to come up with a statistic such as, "How many excess deaths does the IPCC predict from climate change by the year 2100, if governments don't take further action?" If you consult the AR5, which is the latest IPCC report, and look at chapter 11 (Working Group II) on the impacts of climate change on human health, you will see various trouble areas and figures concerning at-risk populations, but nothing so crisp as to allow us to evaluate the casual claims of millions of deaths.
However, the IPCC chapter does tell us upfront:
The Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) pointed to dramatic improvement in life expectancy in most parts of the world in the 20th century, and this trend has continued through the first decade of the 21st century (Wang et al., 2012). Rapid progress in a few countries (especially China) has dominated global averages, but most countries have benefited from substantial reductions in mortality. There remain sizable and avoidable inequalities in life expectancy within and between nations in terms of education, income, and ethnicity (Beaglehole and Bonita, 2008) and in some countries, official statistics are so patchy in quality and coverage that it is difficult to draw firm conclusions about health trends (Byass, 2010). Years lived with disability have tended to increase in most countries (Salomon et al., 2012). 
If economic development continues as forecast, it is expected that mortality rates will continue to fall in most countries; the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates the global burden of disease (measured in disability-adjusted life years per capita) will decrease by 30% by 2030, compared with 2004 (WHO, 2008a). The underlying causes of global poor health are expected to change substantially, with much greater prominence of chronic diseases and injury; nevertheless, the major infectious diseases of adults and children will remain important in some regions, particularly sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (Hughes et al., 2011). [IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group II, Chapter 11, bold added.]
Later in that same chapter, we see the following table, which is illustrative of the general pattern when it comes to long-term projections about climate change harms to humanity:

As the table indicates, the absolute number (let alone the percentage of the population) of undernourished children in all developing countries, even with climate change, is projected (with certain assumptions) to drop by 9.4 million from the year 2000 to 2050. It's true that the number increases in sub-Saharan African, but it falls in every other region. (It also rises in sub-Saharan Africa even without climate change.) We should also keep in mind that UN projections assume the populations in 26 African countries will at least double by 2050, meaning that the percentage of children who are malnourished still drops even in sub-Saharan Africa and even with climate change, according to the UN's estimates.
As I have explained-most recently in this article-when it comes to climate change, the big projected damages don't occur until many decades into the future. But for those people, standard economic growth will have raised their baseline standard of living by so much, that even if the UN-endorsed best-guess projections of climate change are accurate, those humans will still be much better off than we are today.
"It's Getting So Much Better All the Time"
To see more evidence of this pattern, consider the following chart depicting mortality from various causes, created by Our World in Data using data from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), 2018:
As the chart indicates, the death rates from various types of causes have fallen sharply around the world, particularly those from communicable diseases, and all within the last 20 years-when climate change was ostensibly becoming a deadly problem for humanity that only "deniers" could ignore.
For another line of evidence, let me show you a table where the UN did give us some measures of "aggregate" damages from climate change. Specifically, in chapter 10 of the AR5 we see the following table summarizing the climate change economics literature on the subject:

As the table summarizes, even for warming of three degrees Celsius, all but one of the studies predicted non-alarming amounts of damage. (I discuss the table more in this article.) Now I should emphasize that although the impacts are measured in GDP terms, these damage estimates include things like impacts on human health and mortality. It isn't simply a measured reduction in the flow of TV output because some of the factories are under the sea.
In any event, it should be clear from the table that-contrary to James Dyke-we should not expect millions, let alone billions (!), of people to die from climate change. Even if climate change proceeds as the peer-reviewed literature assumes in the most pessimistic emissions scenarios, it will probably merely mean that people in the year 2100 will only be a lot richer than we are, as opposed to a whole lot richer.
What About the Catastrophic Scenarios?
Now it's true, nobody can guarantee that there won't be a climate change catastrophe. But we must realize that at least several of the featured studies warning of huge negative impacts are based on obviously flawed assumptions.
Oren Cass provides us with some examples. One study looked at the increase in mortality in a cold, northern US city during a particularly brutal summer, and then extrapolated to show a staggering number of excess heat deaths decades down the road, when such "bad summers" were more common. Yet in the projections, the northern cities were no hotter than southern US cities are right now, and yes these southern cities don't have nearly the same heat death rate as is projected for the northern cities decades down the road.
What is happening here should be obvious after a moment's reflection: A northern city like Philadelphia is not adapted to hot summer the way Houston or Las Vegas is. But if climate change did indeed make such temperatures the norm-over the course of several decades­-then the residents of the northern cities would adapt. The most alarming of the projections of climate change damages rely on naïve assumptions about human adaptability.They would install more air conditioning, and the people born in the year (say) 2080 would be much better able physically to cope with higher temperatures in 2100 than the people alive today.
This is also the general response I would give the issue of sea-level rise. I think that much of the rhetoric here is overblown, but even to the extent that it is true, we don't need to worry about millions of people literally dying. Even if true, this is a problem that will manifest itself over several generations. If certain coastal regions are truly threatened, then in the worst case humans will stop building (and eventually even repairing) the houses and businesses near the rising seas. Humans can gradually move out of these (sinking) neighborhoods and go further inland, through a process of attrition rather than mass migration in the face of a tidal wave.
The climate change alarmists are given a free pass to throw out the most absurd rhetoric, such as a recent author's warning that potentially billions of people could die because of human-caused climate change. Yet despite their claimed fidelity to the "consensus science," such claims are not supported by the UN's own climate change reports.
The most alarming of the projections of climate change damages rely on naïve assumptions about human adaptability. Even if we stipulate the basic projections made in the most recent IPCC assessment, what "unchecked" climate change will probably mean is that our great-grandkids will see a smaller increase in their standard of living than they otherwise would have, if some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could have been costlessly removed. Such a possible outcome is no reason to panic, and it doesn't justify massive government intervention in the energy or transportation sectors.
This article is republished with permission from the Mises Institute.
nsus science," such claims are not supported by the UN's own climate change reports.
The most alarming of the projections of climate change damages rely on naïve assumptions about human adaptability. Even if we stipulate the basic projections made in the most recent IPCC assessment, what "unchecked" climate change will probably mean is that our great-grandkids will see a smaller increase in their standard of living than they otherwise would have, if some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could have been costlessly removed. Such a possible outcome is no reason to panic, and it doesn't justify massive government intervention in the energy or transportation sectors.
This article is republished with permission from the Mises Institute.

