This week, an intergovernmental panel of scientists reported that climate change is already having sweeping effects on every continent and throughout the world's oceans - and that the problem is likely to grow substantially worse unless greenhouse emissions are brought under control. 
Over the years on The Learning Network, we've published scores of lesson plans and other resources related to the topic of climate change, and in 2010 we collected them all on            one page. 
Below, we update that old collection with seven starting points for teaching and learning about the topic, along with a new list of links to much more, from Learning Network lesson plans to Times video, graphics, articles and photographs.
 Seven Teaching Ideas  
 1. Study the Science 
From the polar vortex to the            flooded streets in Los Angeles, there's no doubt that it's been a crazy winter. But is one crazy winter enough to suggest that the climate is changing? In            "Freezing Out the Bigger Picture," the Times reporter Justin Gillis answers the question, "If the world is really warming up, how come it is so darned cold?"
Have students consider the various lines of evidence showing that the climate is changing, and that humans - and their greenhouse gas emissions - are the ones            responsible for this change.  The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change just issued a            report detailing how climate change will affect people around the world. What evidence do the scientists on the panel use to support their predictions? What, if anything, can be done to mitigate some of the effects of climate change? 
 2. Make Climate Change Local 
Melting ice caps and rising sea levels get a lot of attention in the conversation about climate change. But those effects can feel remote to people not living in the coastal communities affected by this aspect of climate change. To that end, the White House recently started a new website that shows how climate change will affect communities across the United States.  How might your community be affected? 
Consider how climate change will affect the forests, rivers and lakes of North America, or how a warming climate favors            introduced species.  Climate change affects            public health as well. What are some of the public health concerns associated with climate change in your state or region? Wrap up by having students answer our Student Opinion question,            "How Concerned Are You About Climate Change?"
 3. Map Climate Change 
Climate change, and the resulting rise in sea levels, is likely to flood many parts of the world, while generating weather extremes like extended droughts and heat waves in other places. Have students annotate a            map of the world, showing how climate change will affect different regions, and how it is already affecting the people of            Bangladesh.   How should governments prepare for these changes, and what kinds of            climate change preparedness plans are already in place? 
 4. Play With Climate Change 
Have students outline the plot for a novel or play in which the characters in some way face the consequences of climate change.  Or, students might write a first-person essay reflecting their own thoughts about what climate change means to them.  Alternatively, students could play a few            climate change games and then develop the outline for their own interactive game or app that would            teach about the effects of climate change.
 5. Design and Propose Solutions 
Climate change is happening right now, and many experts say now is the time for people to prepare for how it might affect communities across the United States and around the globe.  Have students propose ways to            prepare for the            projected effects of climate change, from increased droughts and wildfires to the greater spread of insect-borne diseases. Find out if your state is part of the Centers for Disease Control            Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative and consider some of the strategies different municipalities are adopting. Students also might form teams to take on the            Coastal Vulnerability Innovation Challenge and propose tools to help members of your community better understand how climate change, and its associated coastal flooding, might affect you.  
 6. Debate Responsibility 
Many of the world's poorest nations contribute the least to the fossil fuel emissions largely responsible for climate change - yet these places will bear most of the consequences of climate change, like extreme coastal flooding. It's a discrepancy that held up recent United Nations climate talks in Warsaw, with poor and low-lying nations arguing that the costs of disasters such as droughts, floods and hurricanes            should be borne by the wealthier nations that have historically polluted the atmosphere with greenhouse gases.  Do those nations whose emissions contributed the most to climate change have a moral responsibility to pay for the effects of those emissions? And if so, how would they pay, and who would determine the kinds of damages those nations should be responsible for? 
 7. Investigate Climate Politics 
While a vast majority of scientists agree that climate change is real and presents a serious danger, some politicians in Washington still seem to be unconvinced. There's a whole camp of            climate denialists. And some people are just            confused about how the earth can be warming when we have just experienced such an unusually cold winter in the central and eastern United States.    
Have students read a recent Times Op-Ed "Climate Signals, Growing Louder." Do students agree with the statement, "Perhaps now the deniers will cease their attacks on the science of climate change, and the American public will, at last, fully accept that global warming is a danger now and an even graver threat to future generations?" Why or why not?