
$700 million. That's how much climate change could cost Alaska, every year, if global temperatures continue to rise at current rates. With the Arctic warmingtwice as quicklyas the rest of the world, addressing climate change is more important in Alaska than perhaps anywhere else.
We simply cannot afford inaction.
As young conservatives and active members of the GOP, we worry that if our party fails to address climate change soon, its political future may be at risk. By supporting a targeted, free-market response to the climate crisis - such as the Baker-Shultz Plan - our party can uphold its core values while gaining the support of new constituencies.
To be clear, we aren't saying Republicans have shirked environmental action. Rather, Alaskans should be proud of the environmental achievements of our Republican delegation in Congress over the past few years. In fact, we think they are among the Republican lawmakers best suited to lead national climate policy.
Sens. Lisa Murkowski and Dan Sullivan have already proven to be an effective bridge between the two parties, while securing policy wins for Alaska, as demonstrated with the recent American Energy Act of 2020 and COVID-19 relief bill.
As Sen. Murkowski concludes her six-year term as chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, the passage of this bill represents a major achievement for our country and Alaska. Crafted under Chairman Murkowski's leadership, the American Energy Act is the most significant piece of energy and climate legislation in decades.
Sen. Sullivan, whom we actively supported in his most recent reelection bidwhile encouraging other young Alaskans to do so, has emerged as a commonsense leader in the arena of environmental policy. This year, in an effort to combat rising levels of plastic ocean debris, Sen. Sullivan sponsored the sweeping Save Our Seas 2.0 Act, which wassigned into law by President Donald Trump last month.
President Biden has already signaled his administration's prioritization of climate change policy. Considering the 50-50 split of the U.S. Senate - with Vice President Harris casting a tiebreaking vote - any substantive policy changes should include Republicans at the table. We think combating climate change can serve as an area of bipartisan cooperation and show Americans that our elected officials can and want to work together for a prosperous future.
The numbers show that young people from both parties support more action on climate change. Young Republican voters are much more willing to support climate-related legislation,even across party lines, than older GOP voters. If Republicans take the lead on this issue, we have a better chance of addressing the climate crisis with rational free-market solutions rather than allowing Democrats to resort to the top-down approach espoused by progressives who believe we can regulate our way to an effective solution.
Alaskans are acutely aware of the dangers a changing climate poses to our economy and way of life. Demonstrated by ever more erratic salmon runs, melting permafrost destroying homes and infrastructure across northern Alaska, and wildfires covering the state in smoke, the impacts from climate change will continue to intensify - costing lives and millions of dollars in lost economic activity.
In order to mitigate the worst effects of a changing climate, organizations like Young Conservatives for Carbon Dividends support a price on carbon. Dubbed the "Baker-Shultz Plan," James Baker and George Shultz, former Republican cabinet Secretaries under President Ronald Reagan, drafted a plan to place a gradually rising price on carbon and return the revenues collected as a dividend to the American people. Under the Baker-Shultz Carbon Dividends plan, the average American family of four could expect a dividend of more than $2,000 annually. The best part is, this plan is proven to be effective and willslash carbon emissions by 57% by 2035, while increasing GDP by $190 billion per year compared to the regulatory approach.
Supported by energy companies - such as ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips - and environmental groups alike, the Baker-Shultz plan is a free-market solution proven to unleash the power of American innovation, promote sustainable economic development, and ensure a near-term competitive advantage for Alaska's oil and gas production.
We look forward to proactive bipartisan legislative efforts led by Sens. Murkowski and Sullivan during the 117th Congress. After the passage of Ballot Measure 2, Alaskans demonstrated their desire for policy outcomes that put Alaska first, and that's exactly what the Baker-Shultz Carbon Dividends plan seeks to accomplish.



"Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is literally a matter of life and death." - Jeff Duchin, Seattle Chief Public Health Officer
We are today tenuously living the extremes. The undeniable scientific truth is that homo sapiens - we humans - combusting fossil fuels is the cause and the driver of rapidly escalating climate change - in truth, climate crisis and global heating plus pollution. We are saturating our only atmosphere with gases - CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, and H2O - yes, water vapor - which quite successfully entrap Earth's heat and thus endow our Earth with this climate crisis and global heating. Ironically, water, the giver of life, when subjected to extreme heat, evaporates but does not only not cool but leaves desiccated lands, intolerable humidity and enters the atmosphere as heat-trapping water vapor.
"These climate crisis extremes ... are the suffering that is here and now," said professor Katharine Hayhoe.
The climate crisis will entail:
 Extreme weather events. Increasing frequency and ferocity of storms, sand storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms, rogue windstorms (and those generated by massive wildfires), causing injuries, drowning, mass fatalities, and mental heath crises.
 Rising seas: coastal flooding, mass migrations.
 Ocean acidification: dying seas, changing food supplies, coral deaths, species extinctions.
 Warming seas: rapidly changing food ecology, extreme weather causation, species extinctions.
 Changing vector ecology: pestilence - viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections, emerging zoonotic diseases (coronavirus), malaria, dengue, Lyme, chikungunya, and West Nile virus, among others and those yet to appear.
 Pollution and particulates: asthma, respiratory failure, COPD, MS, diabetes type 2, cardiovascular disease, stroke, lung cancer, pneumonia, and dementia, among others.
 Deteriorating water quality: cholera, leptospirosis, campylobacter and many others.
 Changing water and food impacts: malnutrition, mass starvation, diarrheal diseases, massive crop failures. Water stress - aridity and desertification.
 Environmental degradation: forced mass migration, civil wars, ongoing mass species extinctions, desertification, crop and forest deaths, wildfires, mental health impacts.
 Global economic collapse.
Among the most concerning for people is extreme heat and humidity. The human body cannot long tolerate heat greater than 95 degrees F and 100% humidity. In those conditions the body is simply unable to sweat and remove heat. Consider the recent heat dome phenomenon in the western U.S. In those conditions, all body organs - especially heart, lungs, muscles, gut, liver and the brain - must labor harder and are imperiled. Essential proteins break down and cause multi-system failure, particularly renal and liver failure. This is heat stroke, and, unless rehydrated, it is fatal.
Those most affected by the climate crisis are children, the disabled and disadvantaged, poor, elderly, immunocompromised and Indigenous peoples.
As health care providers, we fully and completely recognize the immediacy and urgency of the moment. We must act without delay or hesitation. Seventy-four health organizations, including the American Medical Association, American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Physicians, American College of Physicians and the American Academy of Nursing created the U.S. Call to Action on Climate Health and Equity. The charge: To meet our legal and moral obligation to protect all. Thus is inclusive of all living creatures and the seas, land, life-sustaining forests and our indispensable biodiversity.
As the New England Journal of Medicine wrote, we must "heed an absolute imperative for climate change. The climate crisis impacts all life, the practice of medicine, and the very stability of the health care system."
History can tender indispensable perspectives for us.
The ancient Greek in his Hippocratic text on Airs, Waters, Places advised physicians "to attend to all aspects of the environment, to the seasons, direction of the winds, and the quality of sails and waters."
In 1848, Rudolph Virchow observed, "Medicine is a social science, and politics is nothing else than medicine on a large scale." These "diseases of civilization" are determined by global industrialization.
In 1992, the Union of Concerned Scientists decreed, "... a great change in our stewardship of the Earth and life on it is required if vast human misery is to be avoided and our global home on this planet is not to be irretrievably mutilated."
Today, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has declared that we are in a Code Red. Climate change is accelerating faster than we can determine how to act. Furthermore, emissions reductions and decarbonization efforts must increase beyond earlier projections.
Caren G. Solomon, M.D., M.P.H.; and Regina C. LaRocque, M.D., M.P.H., wrote: "We must focus our voices -emphasize climate change in med schools, demand fossil fuels divestment, and how we relate to our fragile environment. Human health and survivability depends on the health of the planet's life support systems. Medical ethics and practice must expand to address Earth's ecosystems and climate change."
How then must a united force of health care providers address the immediacy of the crisis before us today? We must employ every agency-local, state, and federal governments; the global banking and financial industries-Wall street, World Bank, and the IMF; NGO's; the vast environmental community; and every means imaginable.
We are aware of a measure with great promise, and one which has the attention of Congress: the institution of a carbon fee.
To summarize, it would sharply reduce greenhouse gas emissions, or GHGE, and return the fee proceeds to individual household as dividends. The mechanism: a fee on every ton of greenhouse emissions. This fee would sharply reduce GHGE by up to 38% by 2030, and 82-84% in the fossil fuel power sector. We would observe a substantial decrease in pollutants - mercury, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, CO2 and particulates. Carbon fees would increase annually until emissions goals were met and, ultimately, become revenue neutral. If fossil fuel energy costs were to rise, the fee dividends would concomitantly rise and cushion such increases. Enactment would encourage an express progression to alternative, renewable energy, and incentivize innovation, infrastructure development, and carbon efficiencies. The carbon fee would provide regulatory certainty for industry. We hope U.S. leadership would encourage global adoption and application, with enhanced competitiveness, and, ultimately, climate stability.
The Health Care Professional's Climate Action and Carbon Pricing Declaration has been endorsed by the AMA and more than 100 American health organizations as well as the World Bank and the IPCC. Moreover, it enjoys bipartisan congressional support.
We in the health care professions must heed the words and wise counsel of Sir David Attenborough, "The impacts of climate change will be upon us for thousands of years ... The future of humanity and, indeed, all life on Earth, now depends on us."

Two things happened on top of the world this week. In Utqiagvik on Jan. 22 the sun topped the horizon for the first time .
The day before that, Jan. 21, was the first time since Halloween that the town's thermometers recorded a below-normal daily average air temperature.
The returning daylight for the country's farthest-north town쟧s due to a predictable nod of the Earth back toward the sun. Utqiagvik's second day of direct sunlight, Jan. 23, featured almost an hour's increase from the day before. The town will have four hours of daylight by the end of January. By May 11, there will be no night.
Just as dramatic are the recent warm autumns and winters in Utqiagvik. While many people worldwide sense their favorite places are changing, residents of Utqiagvik use the past tense.
"The term is no longer 'climate change' at Utqiagvik. It is 'climate changed.' No doubt about it, based on my 40 years," said biologist Craig George, who studies bowhead whales and other animals from his home in Utqiagvik.
George remembered back to October 1988, when three gray whales became trapped in Beaufort Sea ice just north of Point Barrow. The whales became a worldwide news story, as local rescuers used chain saws to cut circular breathing holes in the sea ice, trying to lead the whales to open ocean.
"This year, we had crashing waves onshore and 34 degrees F on winter solstice," he said. "It's almost like a different planet."
In December, NOAA scientists looking for the latest temperatures from Utqiagvik sensors found computer algorithms had flagged and removed November readings because they seemed so far off.
[]
The average temperature for October through December 2017 was 15.6 degrees F, 12.2 degrees above normal and highest for that span in the last 98 years, according to NOAA climatologist Rick Thoman.
Since 2000, the average October temperature in Utqiagvik has increased 7.8 degrees F. November's average temperature has increased 6.9 degrees and December's, 4.7.
Utqiagvik residents experienced above-normal average daily temperatures 77 percent of the year in 2017, Thoman figured. It seems a different place.
"Barrow (Utqiagvik) presents a great example of a changed climate," said climatologist John Walsh, chief scientist at the International Arctic Research Center.
Utqiagvik also had its latest ground freezeup ever this winter.
"Permafrost temperatures there at (4-foot) depth are 3 to 4 degrees C higher than at the same time last year, even though last year was also warmer than normal," said Vladimir Romanovsky of UAF's Geophysical Institute.
Sea ice that is forming later in the fall and covering less ocean is driving the warmth. Open ocean has a warming effect on the land around it. Utqiagvik is seeming more like Helsinki than a town on the Arctic Ocean.
The Chukchi Sea to the west of Utqiagvik did not ice over until about Jan. 1, 2018, the latest in the satellite record that goes back to the late 1970s. An average date the Chukchi Basin was ice-covered in the late 1980s was about Nov. 20.
Where does Utqiagvik go from here? Residents say they hoped for a return to conditions before the 1990s, when the extreme warming began.
"I've been waiting, almost wishing, for the climate models to be wrong," said George, who works for the North Slope Borough. "No question now. They're right. Argue about the reason, but the fact is, our world has changed."

I want people to speak up and understand the situation about climate change. Climate change is something we should all be worried about, because it affects our lives. It causes many changes for people and causes them to live in different temperatures than they already have. 
I'd like to speak up and let everyone know what's going on and how we can fix it. Climate change happens because of carbon dioxide that goes up into the atmosphere and traps heat. It's not a good thing, because it gets mixed with other greenhouse gases. 
Things that affect us from climate change are rising temperatures, air quality, extreme weather, melting glaciers and more. There could be more, worse outcomes from climate change, but it needs to stop. We all need to contribute and understand this. No one should like climate change, but we all need to know how it affects us and why it's bad for us. A little research about climate change wouldn't hurt - even just looking up how it might affect your communnity and what you can do to help would be great.
Thanks for understanding because even a little bit of time and effort is more valuable than none at all. Please help - speak up and get everyone to know and care. 

It's no secret that Alaskans are on the front lines of climate change, and many of us are demonstrating a desire for policies and actions that address its impacts on our national security, economy and health.
Looking at our business climate, our infrastructure, and the needs of urban and rural residents, it is time for the state to create an Alaska Climate Change Commission that outlives the short-term politics of election cycles. Such a commission would provide consistent information and public accountability in facing this complex problem that will affect all Alaskans and all sectors of our economy well into the future.
Communities across the state have been addressing climatic changes for themselves. For example, the Homer City Council created the first municipal climate action plan in 2007. Since then, at least 10 such plans have been made in communities around the state. Even more communities have established local task forces to develop their own climate plans. Some, like Sitka, are committing resources to maintain and update existing climate plans.
Clear evidence of the rapidly changing environment in Alaska, our strategic location in the Arctic, and our history of practical state politics have made climate policy far less of a divisive partisan issue in the 49th state. Recent calls from moderate and conservative Alaskans show support for federal climate policy that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions while reaping economic benefits.
Policymakers are starting to see that planning for climatic changes does not always have to come with a high economic cost. For example, Anchorage's Climate Action Plan prioritizes actions that result in not only environmental benefits, but also substantial economic and community benefits. By making investments that safeguard Alaska's environment, cultures, and economy now, we can potentially save our cash-strapped state billions of dollars.
We also have a valuable public university system that can support the needs of a nonpartisan climate change commission using nearly a century of data and observations. In fact, theCenter for Arctic Policy Studies - part of UAF's International Arctic Research Center - was established with the mission of linking UAF research with decision-makers, enabling them to develop well-informed policies for our communities.
When it comes to cutting-edge research, the University of Alaska offers the state an intellectual as well as monetary return on its dollar. In fact, every dollar of state support for research at the University of Alaska Fairbanks brings in $6 of external funding. More importantly, it generates new knowledge that can improve Alaskans' safety, infrastructure, and quality of life.
The Alaska "do-it-yourself" mentality can serve us well. Tackling climate change ourselves in-state, where we have the most knowledge of what is happening, can be easier, faster, and more effective than trying to steer the federal government. And while a permanent Climate Change Commission would be new for us, state-level climate policy in Alaska has a thirty-year history, including former Gov. Sarah Palin's Alaska Climate Change Sub-Cabinet and former Gov. Bill Walker's "Climate Change Action Plan Recommendations to the Governor" report. As governors and Legislatures have come and gone, so has consistent climate policy - yet the problem remains and grows more urgent and more expensive the longer we wait. Together, we can change that.
Alaska lawmakers are able to end the partisan approach to climate change policy by creating an enduring climate change commission with public meetings and records preserved in perpetuity. In this way, scientific information, Indigenous knowledge, and the expertise of diverse commission members can be maintained across administrations. We note the importance of incorporating Indigenous knowledge and leadership, as predominately Alaska Native communities are at the forefront of climate change impacts and have developed innovative responses. Alaska has nonpartisan boards and commissions for other issues - so why not to address the challenges of our changing climate?
When we consider the future, we can imagine how a state climate change commission with diverse expertise, the ability to escape short-term electoral pressures, and access to resources from the UA system could begin to meet Alaska's climate change challenges. It is time for an Alaska Climate Change Commission, and we have what we need to make it a success.
Alaskans are well acquainted with rapid change - from our weather and climate to the ever-changing response by communities and industry to economic, policy and environmental shifts. We're seeing statewide temperatures climb three to four degrees Fahrenheit higher than they were a lifetime ago, and our warming oceans are affecting fish, seabirds, marine mammals and those who rely on them for food or work. Also in constant flux are the state's economic drivers and energy options, such as the ups and downs of the natural resource industry or emerging opportunities in the renewable energy and climate change mitigation sector. To make informed decisions that will enable us to cope with these shifts, Alaska needs research that is nimble, timely, and addresses our state's unique priorities and changes.
Investing in University of Alaska research on our region's changing climate can provide the flexibility to stay ahead of tomorrow's problems and develop the knowledge, technology, and solutions we need to compete successfully in the marketplace. Along with state and federal support, University of Alaska donors are helping to make our state more resilient and responsive to climate change impacts and new priorities.
One of those generous donors, the late Roger Markle, created the Roger A. Markle Climate Change Adaptation Endowment by investing $2.1 million in the UAF International Arctic Research Center. Through his generous support, Markle, a former director of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, left a lasting legacy in an area that mattered to him - funding climate change research that makes a difference in the lives of Alaskans. By doing so, he is helping guide the future of research in Alaska.
Ocean acidification is an emerging problem and state priority where University of Alaska endowments like Roger Markle's are already making a difference. Commercial fishermen, subsistence users and sport fishermen alike are concerned about the threat of ocean acidification to salmon, shellfish, crab and the ocean system as a whole. But in Alaska, we don't have a solid understanding of the current status of ocean acidification in our waters, how it may interact with climate change, or what solutions can be developed to maintain food security and support fisheries and aquaculture.
Markle's endowment earnings now help support research to understand how ocean acidification in the Gulf of Alaska may interact with climate change. Addie Norgaard, the UAF graduate student in charge of the project, hopes her work will help the subsistence and commercial fishing communities in the area adapt to and plan for the future.
Such swift response to a regional need is increasingly critical in Alaska. Traditional mechanisms for supporting research, such as through federal grants, are often reactive, sluggish and at times focused on national or global priorities at the expense of local needs. With less restrictive funds, scientists can be more responsive to community needs and partner with local communities, regional organizations, the private sector and others.
National funding initiatives often support research that answers broad questions that have limited use for community level planning and decision making. With the right Alaska-minded funding partners, university researchers can go the extra mile by tailoring models and data analysis to meet specific local needs. Such "downscaled" information can make a real difference in the lives of Alaskans. For example, projections of future snow can inform community-specific snow loads for building projects, extreme rain event statistics can improve culvert and bridge designs, and knowledge of typical weather conditions over remote airfields can make flights to rural Alaska safer.
Roger Markle's endowment is a great step forward and a new beginning for responsive and place-based scientific research to directly benefit Alaskans. We are grateful for his confidence in the University of Alaska and his generous investment in our students and researchers who are working to find solutions for Alaskans.



Page 5 of 20Alaska's young Republicans: It's time to act on climate change; We think combating climate change can serve as an area of bipartisan cooperation.


 


 



Page 9 of 20Climate change is a health care emergency; As health care providers, we fully and completely recognize the immediacy and urgency of the moment.


 


 



Page 20 of 20Together we can ensure a faster, targeted response to climate change


 


 

