
In 1992, a pair of ecologists published a report looking at possible long-term effects of climate change in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem.
           
At the time, research in the area of global warming and climate trends was still fuzzy. The ecologists "stuck their necks out," a colleague later wrote, offering bold predictions about fire frequency and vegetation changes due to climate change.
      
Some 23 years later, the same two ecologists, William Romme and Monica Turner, revisited and revised their predictions during a time when the science of a warming planet and its impacts have come into better focus.
      
Romme and Turner's updated findings are part of a larger 87-page Yellowstone Science report released last month, which includes smaller reports by more than 20 researchers about the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. All are focused on regional Yellowstone changes due to climate change.
      
"This issue represents a critical summary of current climate change knowledge in the park and surrounding area," said acting Yellowstone National Park Superintendent Steve Iobst.
      
"Temperatures are warmer, snowpack is decreasing, springtime arrives sooner, and the growing season is longer," wrote Ann Rodman, branch chief for Physical Resources and Climate Science at the Yellowstone Center for Resources.
      
Following are five takeaways from the report:
      
Warmer weather
      
Average temperatures in Wyoming and the Northern Rocky Mountains, including Yellowstone, have steadily increased in recent years, and scientists expect the trend to continue.
      
Average spring and summer temperatures in Yellowstone are expected to rise by 8 to 10 degrees by the end of the century, Romme and Turner wrote.
      
Hot and dry Yellowstone summers "will become the norm by the latter part of the century," they said.
      
More fire
      
As is the case elsewhere in the West, rising temperatures and drier conditions will mean more forest fires. Eventually, scientists said that could mean each individual fire won't be quite so damaging due to less fuel being available.
      
Romme and Turner wrote that due to frequent fires, many areas of Yellowstone might eventually "resemble open woodlands rather than dense forests."
      
"Even though we will likely see more fires in the future, they may not be as intense or as difficult to control as were the 1988 fires."
      
Killer pests
      
Warming temperatures have caused an outbreak of forest pests, such as bark beetles, which now survive through the winter. In Yellowstone, white-bark pine trees have been hard hit with a 79 percent mortality rate of mature trees, according to the report.
      
However, bark beetles killing off vast swaths of trees in Yellowstone and elsewhere in the Rockies do not necessarily result directly in more devastating wildfires, scientists found. As dead fuels fall to the forest floor, studies show the potential for fast-moving crown fires decreases.
      
Dwindling snowpack
      
Incremental temperature increases and lower precipitation has resulted in a dwindling snowpack in many Yellowstone locations. Of the 30 Yellowstone sites measured each April 1 from 1961 to 2012, 70 percent saw "significant declines" in snow levels, according to the report.
      
The "overall picture of a declining staircase" of snow levels in Yellowstone is "clear," the report said. "People who rely on water that begins its life as snow in the mountains of Yellowstone should be aware of this fact and plan accordingly."
      
Shifting forests
      
Vegetation generally will shift to higher elevations due to the warming climate, according to the report.
      
Sagebrush and junipers will move away from valley floors and up nearby slopes. Douglas fir and aspen forests will no longer be comfortable in the lower forest zones, either. But ponderosa pines, not currently found in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, are expected to move into those lower zones.
      
Yellowstone, Romme and Turner concluded, will not be destroyed - only changed.
      
"Native plants and animals will still be present, including the charismatic elk and bison, even though relative abundances may change and new species will come onto the scene," they wrote.
      
The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, the ecologists said, will continue to be an ideal place to study the impacts of climate change.
      
"Yellowstone will ... become increasingly valuable for its role in allowing processes and changes to play out with minimal intervention, providing a benchmark for understanding how natural systems change and adapt."
     

The flooding and near destruction of Houston and the Gulf Coast will influence public policy for decades to come, writes Llewellyn King. 
           
Almost every word that can be used to describe a disaster has been used to describe the one that has befallen Houston. But there is one that hasn't been used yet: seminal. It means a work, event, moment or figure strongly influencing later developments. 
      
The flooding and near destruction of Houston and the Gulf Coast is such an event. It will influence public policy for decades to come.
      
First, there is going to be the gigantic national job of rebuilding the nation's fourth-largest city - and quite possibly abandoning large parts of it. It will affect property values in flood-prone cities. It will result in urgent calls for the construction of new flood barriers, or the beefing up of those that already exist.
      
Going forward, there will be a new existential threat felt in the United States: climate uncertainty. It will not matter whether the Houston disaster is linked to the burning of fossil fuels. What will matter is that the warnings of dramatic changes in climate will have an influence they have not hitherto had.
      
The sky has fallen.
      
The aberrant weather - which has not only wrecked Houston and Beaumont, Texas, with flooding but also agriculture in much of Sub-Saharan Africa with severe drought - now will be a real concern to Americans. We will start to take notice of floods in faraway places.
      
Leaving aside whether human activity is contributing, climate uncertainty will move to the very front of the national agenda, and it will influence our politics and sensitize us to the warnings of scientists. Those who have thought climate change to be some kind of liberal scheme to punish big coal, big gas and big oil will get short shrift in the court of public opinion.
      
President Trump went out on a limb, urging more coal production, trashing the Paris climate accord, disbanding the federal advisory panel for the National Climate Assessment, shrinking the Environmental Protection Agency and undoing its rules, including the Obama-era Clean Power Plan. But the Houston disaster may have him climbing back.
      
There will be other changes affecting public policy as the nation moves forward. A debt ceiling increase without a shutdown is now assured: No one in Congress or the White House will want stories of Federal Emergency Management Agency employees being furloughed while people are still in shelters in and around Houston - and where they might be for a very long time.
      
There might be a change ahead for Trump's plan, still vague, for a tax overhaul. Large tax cuts may not be appealing to Congress as it contemplates the enormous new costs for cleanup, demolition and construction along the Gulf Coast, and for fortifying coastal cities.
      
Texas will be seeking and getting masses of federal aid. With its powerful congressional delegation and political friends at all levels in the Republican Party, Texas will be hard to deny. It is going to be all Texas, all the time on the news and on Capitol Hill for weeks and months, even years.
      
This will increase the pressure on the Trump administration to make climate a policy priority. If the president won't, Congress will; and it will be because of Houston. New electric generation - wind, solar and possibly nuclear - and electrified cars and trucks will be the winners.
      
It's no longer the economy, stupid. Now it's the climate, stupid - and it will be for decades. Something truly seminal has happened.
     
In modern America, agreement among 60 percent of the electorate represents a landslide victory.
      
That's roughly the percentage of the popular vote that Richard Nixon won in 1972 and that Ronald Reagan received in 1984. It's also the same approximate percentage of Idahoans who believe that climate change is happening, according to a Yale University survey.
      
That research shows that 58 percent of people in Idaho believe that climate change is a real phenomenon. The same survey reveals that 62 percent of people in Bonneville County accept climate change as a reality, just short of the national average of 63 percent. Not a single county in Idaho had a majority of people not believing in climate change as a fact.
      
So, on the surface, it's hard to understand why Idaho legislators are so reluctant to take a position on the issue. Only nine of 105 legislators responded to a simple four-question Post Register survey on climate change. Even more astonishingly, Rep. Dell Raybould, R-Rexburg, implied that Americans should trust Rush Limbaugh over scientists on the issue.
      
Rep. Linden Bateman, R-Idaho Falls, at least accepts the science on climate change but wonders why we would bother to ask legislators their view on the question. The answer to that should be clear - the perspective of the people who set our state's public policy matters a great deal.
      
It's impossible to know the various reasons why legislators didn't respond to the survey. One inference, however, is that many Republicans don't want to take a public stand out of fear of losing to a primary challenger in the next election, and that's an entirely plausible scenario.
      
In Bingham County, for example, Yale University found that only 54 percent of residents believe in climate change. If Bingham County is like the rest of the country, Democrats are far more likely than Republicans to accept that there's a scientific consensus on climate change, so the reasonable conclusion is that a majority of participants in a Republican primary would agree with Raybould.
      
So, there's a small risk to Republicans in some districts in openly going along with the scientists on climate change, but not enough to explain the reaction to our survey.
      
The truth is probably simpler - a lot of our elected officials believe climate change is either an elaborate hoax in which nearly all of the country's top climatologists are co-conspirators, or they believe it's a naturally occurring phenomenon that we can't alter.
      
So, legislators like Rep. Jeff Thomp- son, R-Idaho Falls, who chairs the House Environment, Energy and Technology Committee, want Idaho to join other states in a lawsuit against the EPA, which is requiring a move toward lower emissions from power plants. Speaker of the House Scott Bedke, R-Oakley, believes we should be looking at building more reservoirs just in case climate change reduces Idaho's available water.
      
In short, the reaction to climate change from our Legislature is both predictable and discouraging. As is true with other complex issues, there's no reason to think that's going to change soon.

BOISE - The Idaho Legislature on Wednesday had its first-ever hearing on the issue of global climate change.
           
The meeting wasn't convened by the Senate Resources and Environment committee, nor by the House Environ-
      
ment, Energy and Technology Committee - though the chairman and vice chairman of the House committee, Rep. Dell Raybould, R-Rexburg, and Rep. Jeff Thompson, R-Idaho Falls, were in the audience. Instead, the House Democratic Caucus held the meeting.
      
Attendance was heavy, more than for any other hearing this session. The largest hearing room was packed with perhaps 400 people, and another three overflow rooms were filled with those who couldn't fit.
      
Rep. Ilana Rubel, D-Boise, was the primary organizer of the hearings, which took testimony from area scientists, economists, business leaders and wildfire managers.
      
Rubel said she organized the hearing because climate change is a large problem, and there is no indication the federal government is going to do anything about it.
      
In President Donald Trump's proposed budget, climate change research by the National Aeronautic and Space Administration is defunded, as is research at the Environmental Protection Agency. Meanwhile, there is expanded funding proposed for tasks such as surveying and mapping, useful for fossil fuels extraction.
      
"It really falls to states," Rubel said.
      
Scientists testifying at the hearings included professors Jen Pierce and Kerrie Weppner, both of Boise State University, and professor John Abatzoglou of the University of Idaho.
      
Pierce and Weppner both focused their studies on the relationship between fires and the landscape, looking at patterns over thousands of years rather than year to year. The basic pattern is simple, Pierce said.
      
"Forests burn when it's hot and dry," she said. "They do that now, and they have done that in the past."
      
And recent studies specific to the American West show that since the 1970s, climate change has roughly doubled the area of forest consumed by fire each year, driven by the fact that forests are dryer than they were in the past.
      
Pierce tried to lay to rest a false conception - that there is an active debate in the scientific community as to whether the climate is warming caused by the burning of fossil fuels.
      
Pierce presented analysis from the International Panel on Climate Change showing that approximately 98 percent of recent warming is due to human activity, not natural climate variation. The probability that recent warming is natural is one in an octodecillion (that's a one with 57 zeroes behind it, or about as many sand grains as there are on all the planets in the solar system), Pierce said. And at least 97 percent of scientists agree that the earth is warming and humans are the primary cause.
      
And Pierce said turning a scientific question into a political debate has been harmful.
      
"Fires don't have a political agenda. They just burn," Pierce said.
      
Weppner reviewed the sources of information scientists have about global climate stretching back for millions of years, from tree rings to ocean sediments to Antarctic ice cores. Weppner noted that if you go far enough back in time, there was a period when the earth was warmer than it is today. That was during the Cretaceous Period, which ended about 66 million years ago when dinosaurs walked the planet.
      
"The types of animals that evolved during that warmer climate were adapted to a warmer climate," she noted. But animals living today have evolved to live in a much cooler climate, one from which we are rapidly departing.
      
Abatzoglou noted that humans have so far locked in about 1.8 degrees Celsius of warming, enough to cause the freezing altitude to rise about 500 feet. Winter snow packs throughout the Rockies have been in steady decline, with years such as 2016 being an exception
      
"The best available science says we have far more warming ahead of us and greater impacts ahead of us," he said.
      
And Abatzoglou said it isn't hard to find examples in the recent past of what the future will look like, because the effects of climate change are already being observed. One example would be the winter of 2014, he said, when a "snow drought" led to a very dry summer and rivers turned into creeks.
      
"These are the sorts of years we expect to see more in the future," he said.
      
Professor Scott Lowe, a Boise State economist, has done some of the few studies that attempt to quantify the economic impact of some of these changes. In an analysis published two years ago, he said, the prediction is that low water levels will add about $200 per acre in additional costs for farmers. Given that there are millions of acres under cultivation in Idaho, that amounts to hundreds of millions of dollars draining out of the state economy every year.
      
And that's only one aspect of dozens that's likely to add costs to the economy, he said.
      
Rubel said with federal inaction the state has several options it could pursue to rein in local carbon emissions, from incentives to switch to solar power to increasing fuel efficiency standards.
      
"Many states are doing these things," Rubel said. "We are doing none of them."
     
     
BOISE - The University of Idaho may be the center of climate change research in Idaho, but don't count Moscow Sen. Dan Foreman among the true believers.
      
Foreman, who represents Latah and Benewah counties, said human-caused climate change is a "scam" perpetrated by left-wing fanatics looking for an excuse to raise taxes and grow government.
      
Responding to a recent email regarding a House panel's decision to eliminate any mention of climate change in school science standards, the freshman lawmaker said the theory of global warming is "nonsense."
      
"Global warming ranks right up there with Al Gore's phony ozone scare," he wrote. "I hope the Legislature enacts legislation to eliminate this ridiculous nonsense from all our textbooks. The left wing has created a new religion, and it's called 'the environment.' I wish they'd pay more attention to real religion. Maybe we could make real progress in this country. People need to wake up and rediscover critical thinking once again. Too many people are falling victim to these scams foisted on us by liberal zealots with ulterior motives."
      
There is widespread consensus in the scientific and academic communities for the idea that human industrial activity and fossil fuel consumption is responsible for climate warming trends over the past century. Among other organizations, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Geophysical Union, American Meteorological Society, National Academies of Science and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have all issued statements supporting that conclusion.
      
Nevertheless, during a follow-up interview Foreman said the concern about human-caused climate change is a liberal effort "to push for bigger government and higher taxes in the name of the almighty environment."
      
"There's no substance to (the theory)," he said. "I know credible scientists in the former Soviet Union who have concluded the Earth is actually cooling."
      
Foreman said he fully supports teaching kids as much math, engineering and science as possible, "but let's not run around like Chicken Little teaching something that's proven to be anything but credible."
      
During the election campaign last summer, Foreman made a point of knocking on doors in Moscow to discuss his political views with voters, letting them know he was "a Christian, a conservative and a Republican, in that order."
      
His email messages may sound somewhat abrupt, but in person he comes across as very direct and sincere.
      
"I literally get thousands of emails each week," Foreman said. "I try to answer them all, so I have to be short. I feel obligated to answer them honestly. I'm short and to the point, but I'm always courteous and always say 'Thank you.' I say, 'Here's the way I see things; I understand you may see them differently, but I'm doing you the courtesy of telling you exactly what I think.'"
      
As an aside, he also noted that he wasn't following the standard advice given to new lawmakers to keep their mouths shut and ears open.
      
"That got boring real quick."
     
On January 3, the Post Register reported many of our state's legislators doubt the scientific community's consensus view on climate change.
      
On January 6, our editorial "Many of Idaho's legislators may not accept climate change" appeared on the Commentary page. In essence, the commentary expressed the Post Register editorial board's sense of discouragement that "a lot of our elected officials believe climate change is either an elaborate hoax in which nearly all of the country's top climatologists are co-conspirators, or they believe it's a naturally occurring phenomenon that we can't alter."
      
What followed over the course of the next month was a flurry of letters from readers discussing this matter so frequently; we decided to re-implement an old "two-a-month" rule for frequent letter writers.
      
We now publish the letters we've received on the issue for the final time. It's time to put the matter to rest.
      
The Commentary page is a public forum for discussion. That said, after much research, it is clear there is no new legitimate science (as of February 19, 2016) that can show climate change is a "hoax," a "conspiracy" or a "matter of opinion."
      
We do not debate religion on this page, and therefore it only seems fair that we close down discussions that make "belief" in climate change a matter of faith as well. Until new, peer-reviewed science shows there is reason for doubt, this discussion is closed.
      



Page 19 of 19House editorial: Climate change is not a matter of faith


 


 

