This has been a year marked by terrifying news about climate change: extreme weather, massive wildfires, persistent drought in some areas and catastrophic flooding in others.
The sense of impending doom was made official when the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned that the world is almost certain to blow past the target set by the 2015 Paris Agreement of holding the increase in global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius above the 19th century level.
That was "a code red for humanity," U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned. "Global heating is affecting every region on Earth, with many of the changes becoming irreversible."
And yet, as improbable as it seems, there are glimmers of hope on the horizon.
Public opinion has moved, partly because more people now have firsthand experience with the effects of climate change. A poll sponsored by Yale and George Mason universities reported this month that a record 76% of Americans think global warming is real; only 12% think it isn't.
"Denialism," the dismissal of climate change as bogus, is dying.
An increasing number of Americans want their political leaders to do something about climate change. A Pew Research Center poll in May found that almost two-thirds say it should be treated as a top priority.
That's tempered by the fact that Americans rank plenty of other issues -- beginning with the economy and COVID-19 -- as "top priorities."
But among Democrats and young voters especially, climate has become a core issue. They want their government to act.
Political leaders follow the poll numbers. In Europe, climate is a serious priority for almost all major parties. In the United States, the issue is polarizing; many Republicans are still skeptical. But for Democrats like President Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, acting against climate change has become a must-do.
Next month, many of those politicians, including Biden, will head to the Scottish city of Glasgow for a summit meeting. The purpose is to win new commitments for action -- especially from China, the industrial behemoth that burns more coal than the rest of the world combined.
The good news there is that China, which has long proclaimed its intention to clean up its energy sector someday, is increasingly a global outlier.
The International Energy Agency, which once championed fossil fuel industries, now says demand for oil, gas and coal could peak within a decade -- thanks mostly to the rise of solar, wind and other low-carbon technologies.
"There is increasing optimism in the climate and energy communities that [carbon dioxide] emissions have plateaued or are now plateauing," Dagomar Degroot, an environmental historian at Georgetown University, told me last week. "Scenarios that forecast soaring emissions now seem implausible."
That doesn't mean the problem is solving itself, he warned.
"Warming will continue until we release fewer emissions than can be absorbed. ... That threshold still seems to be decades away. We need to work harder to bring it closer."
But while there's not much optimism in the short term, the long-run goal of slowing and then reversing global warming no longer looks unreachable. The problem can be solved with tools we have: evolving technologies, efficiency and conservation.
The environmental movement's problem now, perversely, isn't denialism; it's "doomism," the view that the planet's collapse is inevitable, and efforts to prevent catastrophe are futile.
"Fear-based messaging" was once useful because it grabbed people's attention, but now it risks getting in the way, Katharine Hayhoe, chief scientist of the Nature Conservancy, told me. Her new book, "Saving Us," makes a case for hope.
Doomism "isn't helpful when it leads to inaction," she said. "We're not just tied to the railway track, where there's nothing we can do. We're in the locomotive with our hand on the throttle. We have the ability to take our hand off the throttle and put our foot on the brake.
"We can't avoid all the impacts, because some of them are here today. But we absolutely can avoid the worst impacts," Hayhoe added.
The next three decades will still be hard. The IPCC report described five possible scenarios for the rest of this century; even the most optimistic forecasts that temperatures will continue to rise through at least 2050. The five "best estimates" for the year 2100 were temperature increases ranging from 1.4 to 4.4 degrees Celsius.
The question for the politicians who are about to gather in Glasgow is: How much will they do to reduce those numbers? Which scenario do they want to bequeath to their successors -- and to their grandchildren?
But it's just possible that this decade could be remembered as one in which humans solved a collective problem and began to tame climate change. That, at least, provides grounds for hope.



I was in high school when the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released its finalized "Fifth Assessment Report." For a week in 2014, the report occupied my computer screen, side by side with an unfinished college application essay.
IPCC reports are the most comprehensive accounts of how human activities influence the climate. In the seven years since the IPCC released its fifth report, I completed a bachelor's degree, spent a year in the workforce, completed a master's degree and began a career in energy policy. Over the same time, humanity emitted about 220 billion tons of CO2, more than the total emitted from the beginning of the Industrial Age to the end of World War II. So as the release of the IPCC's sixth assessment approached this year, I found myself dreading what it would reveal.
On Aug. 9, I found out. The latest report represented "a code red for humanity," the U.N. secretary-general said. All my fears, confirmed.
But the horror I anticipated never arrived. I combed through page after page of catastrophic projections with the same level of alarm I'd have reading a recipe for peach cobbler. At the end of the document, I closed the tab and opened an article about the Tokyo Olympics. Ashamed as I am to admit it, I felt nothing.
At the age of 25, I am of a generation of people who have been aware -- terrifyingly, paralyzingly aware -- of climate change for our entire lives. From the moment I began to take an interest in world affairs, I have been cognizant of a terrible danger beyond the horizon, a near insurmountable challenge that could throw the world I knew into chaos. In sixth grade, a close friend confessed to me that he had been losing sleep worrying about climate change. I told him I had too.
For me, and I suspect for my friend, the climate crisis has never been about hope. In my quarter-century on Earth, no great challenge -- be it terrorism, disease or economic catastrophe -- has gone unmet by division, bigotry and greed; why should climate change be any different? With each passing year, I have seen the window of opportunity to act grow ever narrower, all the while becoming more confident in my hopelessness.
But neither has the climate crisis evoked the fatalism that often accompanies hopelessness. Not once in my lifetime has the apparent inevitability of climate catastrophe overwhelmed my motivation to act on it. In my head, I am forever on a sinking ship, faced with the choice of passively drowning or swimming doggedly for shore. And so I swim, understanding I will probably drown, but certain that doing something is better than doing nothing.
Many in my generation approach the climate crisis through this confusing cocktail of pessimism and determination. With no hope of avoiding catastrophe, we nevertheless campaign tirelessly for this impossibility. We have seen no evidence that society will solve this problem, yet we act each day as if it might.
This is why I felt nothing reading the latest IPCC report. It held within its pages a simple confirmation of what my generation had already observed: a detailed catalog of repeated, inexcusable failures to deal with an ever-apparent crisis.
The report belatedly acknowledges an off-ramp. There is still, it reminds us, the possibility of limiting global warming to 1.5?C. Should humanity collectively commit to solving the problem, there remains a tiny chance of avoiding catastrophe.
Popular discourse parrots this approach. Politicians fighting for climate action obligatorily reframe the crisis as an opportunity. Reporters interviewing experts end each segment with the question, "What gives you hope?" (I am guilty of this.) Through it all, we are told a singular message: The only way to overcome the challenge of climate change is to hold out hope that we will do so.
This message is simplistic at best, condescending at worst. Younger generations consistently report pessimism and depression over the impending climate crisis. These same generations are leading the global wave of activism and electoral support for climate action. Through it all we have proved capable of holding two conflicting ideas in mind at once. On the one hand, we acknowledge the near inevitability of catastrophic climate change. On the other, we understand we must fight against it because, after all, what other option do we have?
Beyond hope there is more than despair. There is determination, realism and action. There is a generation raised amid the ravages of a changing climate making every effort -- a constant effort -- to prevent the inevitable. The ship may sink, but we are going to swim like hell toward shore.


Joshua trees, the tall, twisty succulents that mark the Mojave Desert, are survivors.
Unlike coast redwoods or giant sequoias, they largely escaped harvesting and habitat losses when Europeans colonized their home. They flourished, in fact, until the last decades of the 20th century brought sprawling development and a changing climate.
Three weeks ago, a federal court ruled that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service underestimated these threats in a 2019 assessment and must reconsider Joshua trees for protection under the Endangered Species Act. That protection would be a first step toward securing the trees' future, but only a first step.
Today, Joshua trees are ensnared in a tangle of interlocking threats. Models of future climates show that 90% or more of the trees' current habitat will be unsuitable by the end of this century. In the hotter, drier parts of the Mojave, seedling Joshua trees are already a rare sight. More mobile animal and plant species have already begun to shift to cooler and wetter portions of their ranges, but not only are Joshua trees rooted in the ground, their seeds are inefficiently dispersed by desert rodents. Given that the trees take decades to grow to reproductive age, and their capacity for movement is at most a few hundred yards a generation, they cannot hope to outpace climate change.
There are Joshua tree stands where climates could stay suitable even 80 years from now -- "climate refugia," they're called. Unfortunately, not all refugia are on protected lands, and even a climate refuge inside a national park is not secure against the increasing frequency of wildfire across the Mojave. The cooler conditions that define refugia are also more suitable for certain grasses, which create a carpet of vegetation to fuel fires, and droughts supercharged by climate change ensure that this vegetation carpet is tinder-dry.
There are refugia in the higher elevations of Joshua Tree National Park, but up to half of them have burned in recent decades. Another likely refuge was decimated by last year's Cima Dome fire in the Mojave National Preserve, which incinerated as many as a million Joshua trees. Restoring populations after these losses will take decades.
Joshua trees are also threatened by expanding urban areas -- the Antelope Valley cities of Lancaster, Palmdale and Victorville have quintupled in population since 1980 -- and by the development that comes with mining and with wind and solar power generation.
The Bureau of Land Management is considering a proposal for mining exploration near Conglomerate Mesa, a possible climate refuge with extensive Joshua tree woodlands. The Mojave is also slated for intensive solar energy development to address the wider threat of climate change. The federal government's Desert Renewable Energy and Conservation Plan designated 600 square miles of the Mojave for energy development, and by one estimate, the state of California would need to fill most of that space with solar farms to achieve its planned carbon emission reductions.
Many of these farms can be built without compromising pristine Joshua tree habitat, but there is no doubt that the scale of development needed to bring climate change under control will be enormous. Ironically, building the renewable energy capacity we desperately need to avert more severe climate change may be, in some cases, in direct conflict with Joshua trees' capacity to survive climate change.
With climate catastrophe now a fact of daily life, we must act urgently to find and protect the Joshua tree populations best equipped to survive. Fighting to save every last Joshua tree will not only be futile; it also risks wasting time, resources, invaluable social capital and political goodwill.
Our best hope is to focus on protecting places where Joshua trees still have a fighting chance -- but we do not yet have the data we need to identify those places with confidence.
To decide which Joshua trees need focused protections, we must dramatically improve our collection of on-the-ground information about the health of Joshua tree populations across the Mojave: which ones are successfully growing new seedlings and which are faltering. We also need genetic data of a quality that has rarely been gathered in other threatened species, to pinpoint gene variants that allow Joshua trees to weather the harshest conditions. Populations that already harbor those variants may become high priority for protection.
We could also replant burned areas in climate refugia with seeds genetically calibrated to survive warmer, drier conditions, or even supplement failing populations with seeds transplanted from their more robust kin.
The people who live in and enjoy the wild landscapes of the Mojave must be partners in this effort, from data collection to decision-making. The tribal, state and local governments that oversee much of the private land in the region must be included in the development of any plans to steward its most distinctive tree, and those plans will be far more successful with the input and support of the people who call the desert home.
None of this will be easy. It would be far simpler to declare every tree sacred and be done. That approach, however, would fail to harness the resilience that lies within Joshua tree populations -- and it could jeopardize the broader fight against climate change. Joshua trees are a case study in the tangle of trade-offs we must make to protect biodiversity on a warming planet. With care and perspective, they could become a model for how we solve these dilemmas.


Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III declared global warming an existential threat to U.S. national security at a White House climate summit earlier this year. Using language normally applied to conventional adversaries like China and Russia, Austin described the climate crisis as "a profoundly destabilizing force for our world," generating widespread havoc and bloodshed.
If we take his assessment at his word, the Department of Defense will have to mobilize its capabilities as if preparing for a major war -- altering its priorities and operations and hardening its military bases against extreme climate effects.
This will prove no easy task. The Pentagon is the nation's leading institutional consumer of fossil fuels and the single largest institutional producer of greenhouse gases in the world. In 2020, for example, the U.S. armed forces were responsible for approximately 52 million metric tons in carbon dioxide emissions -- more than was emitted by some entire countries, such as Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
Clearly, the U.S. cannot reduce its national greenhouse gas emissions rapidly without a sustained drive by the Pentagon to abandon carbon-based fuels in favor of renewable energy. Of course, the technologies it must develop to achieve such advances would have widespread application to the civilian economy as well.
The benefits to America's future -- and the world's -- would be broad. But it all depends on whether the Pentagon leadership is serious about treating climate change as an existential threat and acting accordingly.
Only in recent years has the military begun to consider climate change in its operations -- focusing on how this crisis affects its bases, since some of its major coastal installations are under threat from rising seas, severe storms and persistent flooding.
In recognition of these perils, the Defense Department finally identified global warming as a national security concern in 2010. Climate change, its Quadrennial Defense Review stated, "could have significant geopolitical impacts around the world," while also jeopardizing the utility of key bases at home.
That year, for the first time, the department adopted specific objectives for wide reductions in fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions. Under its Strategic Sustainability Performance Plan for 2010, the department pledged to reduce petroleum use by its nontactical vehicle fleets by 30% by 2020 relative to 2005. The plan also included the objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions at U.S. military installations and their energy suppliers by 34% relative to 2008.
Over the next 10 years, the department made impressive efforts to fulfill these objectives, replacing 44% of its petroleum-fueled vehicles with hybrids and all-electric cars and building massive solar arrays to generate electricity for its bases.
In 2020, the Pentagon stated it reduced petroleum use by 41% relative to 2005 and cut greenhouse gas emissions by 23% relative to 2008.
But, crucially, these targets did not apply to ships, aircraft and combat vehicles -- almost all of which continue to be powered by petroleum and remain a major source of greenhouse gases. Jet fuel for military planes is a huge emitter. A B-2 bomber, for example, uses 4.2 gallons of fuel to travel just one nautical mile; a single air mission puts hundreds of tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
During Donald Trump's presidency, talk of climate change largely disappeared from official Pentagon statements and the sense of urgency in resisting it seemed to dissipate as senior officers began to emphasize the growing threats from China and Russia. Now, with Joe Biden in the White House and Austin at the Pentagon, climate change has again been identified as a major security threat, one that requires a full-scale response.
However, the Pentagon has yet to outline specific actions or objectives that would include far greater reductions in fossil fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions than its 2010 sustainability plan included. If climate change poses an "existential" threat, it is imperative that these goals be extended to tactical as well as nontactical military vehicles. Additionally, all U.S. military installations should be required to obtain all of their primary energy from renewable sources by 2035.
Mobilization on this scale would require a major allocation of Defense funds and resources. This is not beyond the Pentagon's capabilities, given that it was able to reduce its petroleum consumption and greenhouse gas emissions between 2010 and 2020.
With access to the world's largest research budget, the department and its top scientists have the capacity to create the technologies needed to achieve major breakthroughs in green energy and transportation -- technologies that could be adopted broadly.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, known as DARPA, could take the lead. The agency has helped develop advancements such as GPS, the internet and artificial intelligence. It recently began a program called Reefense to use reefs, natural features and engineered structures to protect 1,700 department-managed military facilities that are threatened by sea level rise and coastal flooding from storms and wave action.
The Defense Department now needs to go beyond preparing for the consequences of climate change to being a leader in developing broad-based technologies to reduce global warming. It has the financial resources and scientific expertise to take on this challenge. Now the order must be given.



COVID-19 is a nightmare that has left more than 600,000 people dead in the United States alone. But from the very start it was also a clear dress rehearsal for the looming global catastrophe of climate change, which is barreling toward us and likely to wreak more damage than the pandemic.
Early on, it seemed as if COVID might sober us up, and teach us some useful lessons for that other great and imminent threat. Perhaps the coronavirus would force us to acknowledge that there really are invisible dangers in the world, and that there really are experts who know more than we do. Perhaps it would show us that if we don't act to avert crises sooner rather than later, the problems only get worse.
Climate activist Bill McKibben suggested something along those lines. "This might be the moment when we decide to fully embrace the idea that science, you know, works," he wrote back in March 2020. U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres called COVID-19 a "wake-up call" for climate change.
But here in the United States, we did not rise to the occasion. We did not wake up. Instead, we bungled much of our response to COVID, making the situation worse than it had to be. It's not clear we learned much of anything as a nation.
I was reminded of that again Monday when the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued its most dire report yet (each has been more dire than the last). The IPCC concluded that humans can no longer reverse some of climate change's effects or stop its intensification over the next three decades. Therefore, we should expect more raging storms, devastating heat waves, harrowing floods, out-of-control fires, severe droughts and other "extreme events unprecedented in the observational record."
That wasn't the part that bothered me. I expected no less.
What bothered me was the frustrating conclusion that we could still head off the most devastating climate change effects if we took immediate concerted action. Sharp cuts in carbon emissions beginning right now could make an enormous difference in what lies ahead.
It's frustrating because why think that any such thing will happen? Isn't concerted action what Americans just showed we cannot do -- pull together, sacrifice together, expect that Washington will behave rationally or that our leaders will lead? I'm pleased there's still hope, but what indication is there that we will avail ourselves of it?
In response to the pandemic here in the U.S., many millions of people behaved responsibly, wore masks, got shots and made sacrifices for more than a year.
But many, many millions of others responded by denying the facts and disbelieving the science. They chose stubbornness and know-nothingism. They chose shortsightedness. Some were misinformed; others were in the grip of fantastical conspiracy theories.
Worse yet, many elected officials, led by then-President Trump, were willing to politicize the pandemic, spreading bad information or encouraging misbehavior. Some merely kept quiet, like the New Mexico mayor quoted in The Times on Monday who says he no longer urges his constituents to get vaccinated: "You could lose votes for pushing the vaccine too much."
That kind of gutlessness is why case numbers are going up and new virus variants are threatening to send us all back into hiding. Only about 58% of vaccine-eligible Americans are fully immunized.
COVID could have been stopped much sooner. A minor step like getting a shot in the arm -- how difficult is that? It's not an affront to liberty to ask people to get a lifesaving vaccination.
If people won't get vaccinated or wear masks, how can they be expected to transform their lives as climate change requires? Answer: They can't.
And fighting climate change is even harder than fighting COVID in this sense: With COVID, there's no trillion-dollar industry with a vested interest in making sure you don't believe in it.
Unfortunately, neither the capitalist system (which too often encourages corporations to maximize profits at society's expense) nor our democratic system (which allows citizens to toss out politicians who call for unpleasant efforts) seems particularly well-suited to meet the climate battle.
Here's what the IPCC report says: Melting ice and rising sea levels are accelerating. Extreme weather events are worsening. Even if we cut emissions drastically now, some climate changes are "locked-in" and will be "irreversible" for centuries. In about a decade, we're expected to barrel past the limits on warming that the Paris pact sought to set.
The pandemic dress rehearsal didn't go so well. And with each passing year, each passing presidential administration, each rise in temperature, each new season of wildfire or flood or drought -- the problems ahead become deeper and harder to solve.
The lessons of COVID ought to be clear: We cannot dismiss science or blithely ignore what we know is coming at us. We need to work together, look out for others and accept that sacrifices will be necessary, as we have sometimes done in wartime.
We need leaders -- Republicans and Democrats alike -- who will acknowledge reality and instead of pandering for votes at any cost, press us to meet our obligations to the world and to each other. The threat to the planet is real, and we won't be saved by self-delusion, conspiracy theories or stubborn, studied ignorance.



As the world staggers through another summer of extreme weather, experts are noticing something different: 2021's onslaught is hitting harder and in places that have been spared global warming's wrath in the past.
Wealthy countries including the United States, Canada, Germany and Belgium are joining poorer and more vulnerable nations on a growing list of places suffering extreme weather events that scientists say have some connection to human-caused climate change.
"It is not only a poor-country problem -- it's now very obviously a rich-country problem," said Debby Guha-Sapir, founder of the international disaster database at the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters at Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium. "[The rich] are getting whacked."
Killer floods hit China, but hundreds also drowned in parts of Germany and Belgium not used to being inundated. Canada and the Pacific Northwest had what climate scientist Zeke Hausfather called "scary" heat that soared past triple digits, shattering records and accompanied by unusual wildfires. Now, southern Europe is seeing unprecedented heat and fire.
And peak Atlantic hurricane and U.S. wildfire seasons are only just starting.
When what would become Hurricane Elsa formed July 1, it broke last year's record for the earliest fifth-named Atlantic storm. Colorado State University has already increased its forecast for the number of named Atlantic storms. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will update its season outlook on Wednesday.
For fire season, the U.S. West is the driest it has been since 1580, based on soil-moisture readings and tree-ring records, setting the stage for worsening fires if something ignites them, said UCLA climate and fire scientist Park Williams.
What happens with U.S. hurricane and fire seasons drives the end-of-year statistics for total damage costs of weather disasters, said Ernst Rauch, chief climate and geoscientist for insurance giant Munich Re. So far this year, he said, wealthier regions have seen the biggest economic losses.
When poorer countries are hit, they are less prepared and their people can't use air conditioning or leave, so there's more harm to human life, said Hausfather, climate director of the Breakthrough Institute. Although hundreds of people died in the Pacific Northwest heat wave, he said the number would have been much higher in poor areas.
Madagascar, an island nation off East Africa, is in the middle of consecutive droughts that the United Nations warns are pushing 400,000 people toward starvation.
Although it's too early to say that the summer of 2021 will break records for climate disasters, "we're certainly starting to see climate change push extreme events into new territories where they haven't been seen before," Hausfather said.
The number of weather, water and climate disasters so far this year is only slightly higher than the average of recent years, said disaster researcher Guha-Sapir. Her group's database, which she said is still missing many events, shows 208 such disasters worldwide through July -- about 11% more than the last decade's average, but a bit less than last year.
Last year, the record-shattering heat was in Siberia, where few people live, but this year it struck Portland, Ore., and British Columbia, which is getting more Western media attention, Hausfather said.
What's happening is "partly an increase in the statistics of these extreme events, but also just that the steady drumbeat, the pile on year-on-year ... takes its cumulative toll on all of us who are reading these headlines," said Georgia Tech climate scientist Kim Cobb.
"This pattern of recent Northern Hemisphere summers has been really quite stark," said climate scientist Peter Stott of the University of Exeter.
Although overall temperature rise is "playing out exactly as we said 20 years ago, ... what we are seeing in terms of the heat waves and the floods is more extreme than we predicted back then," Stott said.
Climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events.
Aside from floods and fires, heat waves are a major risk to prepare for in the future, Guha-Sapir said.
"It's going to be a very big deal in the Western countries because the most susceptible to sudden peaks of heat are older people. And the demographic profile of the people in Europe is very old," she said.



Page 8 of 20Hope isn't a climate-change option -- but activism is


 


 



Page 11 of 20We'll have to sacrifice Joshua trees to save them


 


 



Page 14 of 20Second Opinion :: BIG IDEAS ON GLOBAL CHALLENGES; The military can lead in the fight against climate change; The Defense Department has the expertise. Now it mu....


 


 



Page 17 of 20We blew the climate change dress rehearsal


 


 



Page 20 of 20PERSPECTIVES; Climate change no longer sparing wealthy countries; North American fires and floods in Europe show broad reach of extreme weather.


 


 

