Date and Time: Sunday, October 17, 2021 1:17:00 PM EDTJob Number: 155497775Document (1)1. WHAT WOULD DARWIN DO?Client/Matter: -None-Search Terms: climate changeSearch Type: Natural Language Narrowed by: Content TypeNarrowed byNewsLocation: Arizona,New Mexico,Oklahoma,Texas; Sources: The Santa Fe New Mexican,The Daily Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK),Yellow Sheet Report,Arizona Capitol Times,The Taos News,Lubbock Avalanche-Journal (Texas),Texas Monthly,The Norman Transcript (Oklahoma),East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona),Enid News & Eagle (Oklahoma),Journal Record Legislative Report (Oklahoma City, OK),Odessa American (Texas),The Beaumont Enterprise (Texas),Tahlequah Daily Press (Oklahoma),The Brownsville Herald (Texas),The Monitor (McAllen, Texas),Ada Evening News (Oklahoma),Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas),Stillwater NewsPress (Oklahoma)

WHAT WOULD DARWIN DO?The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)August 17, 2007 FridayCopyright 2007 The New MexicanSection:ÊPASATIEMPO; Pg. PA-94Length:Ê1535 wordsByline:ÊPAUL WEIDEMANBodyThe cod are moving. Some of the world's fisheries are suffering great losses recently, but in Greenland, cod catches are growing tremendously. Farmers there are also finding they are growing more hay and keeping sheep out longer to feed on fall grasses before winter turns more of the world's largest island to snow and ice."Greenland does have a longer growing season now," said Eric Blinman, director of the Museum of New Mexico's Office of Archaeological Studies. "Vegetable gardens are now diverse, sheep ranching is expanding, and their fisheries are changing with increases in locally [rebounding] species like cod."Blinman participated in an international forum on climate change held in Greenland in late June. At noon Wednesday, Aug. 22, he gives a free talk -- "The King and I: A Non-Lyrical View of the Past, Present, and Future of Global Climate Change" -- for the Friends of Archaeology at the New Mexico Film Museum.Climate change is just that: change. In itself it isn't good or bad, but it can be drastic for every human population accustomed to, and dependent on, a certain range of temperature and rainfall."The period of good agricultural climate that enabled the monumental architecture of Chaco Canyon was the result of climate change that destroyed high-elevation villages in New Mexico, Utah, and Colorado," Blinman said in a recent interview. "The climate change that ended the possibility of high-elevation agriculture in this part of the world opened up tremendous agricultural potential at lower elevations."Blinman traveled to Narsaq, Greenland, to take part in the colloquium "Past Climate Change: Human Survival Strategies," an examination of past human responses to climate change to find inspiration for thinking about climate change today. As Sweden's King Carl XVI Gustaf put it in his introductory remarks: "We need to look back in order to move forward."Blinman was one of five archaeologists in the panel of 16. None were political leaders. "We cannot look at leaders, because they won't be elected when they're advocating that people will have to change the way they're living," Blinman said. The king of Sweden may not act politically, he added, "but he can sponsor things like this colloquium and let the energy in the group spread."Greenland, a self-governing division of the kingdom of Denmark, is -- with Scandinavia, Siberia, Alaska, and northern Canada -- one of most northerly of the world's inhabited environments and, as such, one of the first countries seeing the effects of global warming. "As you realize, the place we have chosen for this colloquium is closely related to the topic we will be discussing," King Gustaf said. "Here, in Southern Greenland, the Norse settlements in the medieval times lasted for almost five centuries. Their mysterious disappearance gives a fascinating illustration for the interplay between human conditions and climate."Climate change is thought to be a possible answer to the mystery of the sudden disappearance of the Norse from Greenland in the 15th century.During the four-day event, each participant gave his or her presentation, listened to the presentations of others, and took trips to archaeological sites on the island. Among the presenters were two climate specialists, one (from Sweden) who does not believe in greenhouse-gas contributions to climate change and one (from Australia) who does, Blinman said.An Inuit diplomat spoke about thinning ice on local fjords that has disrupted communication among communities, because in some places people can't drive on the ice as they're used to doing.The presenters who most impressed Blinman were Fotis Kafatos, chairman of immunogenomics in the Natural Sciences Department of London's Imperial College, and Cary Fowler, executive director of the Rome-based Global Crop Diversity Trust, which Blinman called "the mother of all seed banks." Fowler's presentation was focused on the state of world food crops, the challenges facing subsistence agriculture and export agriculture, and the importance of genetic diversity within crops."Cary told a side story regarding Hopi corn," Blinman said. "In the 1940s, the U.S. Department of Agriculture collected specimens of Hopi corn with the intention of preserving the variety [color, size, time of yield, and other characteristics] in an Ames, Iowa, seed bank."For most crops you have to reproduce the seed in the seed bank every 20 years," he said. "You have to pull out the seed, let it grow, harvest the plant, and collect the seed. Cary told about a woman who did a study using gene sequencing with some of the original 1940s corn, the new seed versions after planting the original corn and harvesting, and the seed that's used today at Hopi. Her study showed equivalent variety in the 1940s corn and the modern Hopi corn, but the variety in the propagated sample was reduced."The experiment demonstrated how rapidly natural selection can take place, Blinman said. Because the propagated corn was grown in the rich soil and wetter climate of Iowa, the corn "decided" it didn't need to preserve a genetic resistance to a harsher climate."One of our staff members at [the Office of Archaeological Studies] grows chile in Santa Cruz, and he always includes chile seed from his neighbors when he plants," Blinman said. "Whether the farmers understand it in Darwinian terms or not, they've developed a tradition that tends to guarantee genetic diversity."The two sides of the debate over genetically modified organisms were a subject for Kafatos, who said humans must have access to as great a genetic diversity as possible if plants are going to weather climate change."One example of the problem is the wheat rust that's been decimating crops in central Africa the last five years," Blinman said. "The rust is air-distributed, and it will likely spread to the Middle East and Asia soon. Researchers have been trying to find a solution, with no success. This is where we see the two sides to GMOs. In a corporate sense, GMOs are products that are uniform, high-yield, low-variety cultigens that do well under normal conditions. But what we need are high-variety genetic stocks if we're going to find a natural solution for a rust-resistant wheat."Blinman said Fowler is willing to open his seed bank to genetically modified seeds, because every kind of seed may prove valuable in the future. And Kafatos, he said, blames science for failing to participate in public debate and education on important issues. "In the cases of GMOs and stem-cell research, Kafatos says science has failed to aggressively defend them from political attacks -- attacks from the right on stem-cell research and from the left on GMO research."Blinman based his presentation on the record of human populations, economics, social structures, and climate change in the American Southwest during the past 2,000 years, which he said is the richest such record in the world. One reason for that is the dry climate, Blinman said, and another is the accumulated data from tree-ring dating. "Human beings cut down trees for structures, and if a structure burns, the wood is well-preserved," he said; most tree-ring data comes from burned wood, according to Blinman.Scientists strive to understand past conditions by studying historical data from tree-ring analyses; they compare that with long-term climate-change information gleaned from pollen studies and geomorphology -- arroyo formation, floodplain formation, and other changes in the landscape. Blinman said evidence indicates that human populations in the Southwest have had to deal with at least seven significant climate transitions over the past two millennia."These transitions destroyed stable communities and allowed the development of stable communities elsewhere," he said. "We had climate change in the 1190s that opened the Galisteo Basin to maize agriculture. That opening lasted over 250 years, but in the late 15th century, the climate reverted and half of the pueblos there were abandoned by the time Coronado came through."During the 17th century the remaining pueblos in the basin were mission communities surviving with a mix of maize and European crops like wheat and rye, as well as sheep and cattle. With the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, Native people rejected European ways and, by 1692, when the Spanish came back, all the Galisteo Basin communities were abandoned. As soon as they [Pueblo people] tried to rely only on their traditional subsistence agriculture, they couldn't do it, because the climate had changed."The Spanish colonization of New Mexico was a matter of serendipity, Blinman said. "The Spanish came in at a time when Pueblo populations were seriously affected by climate change."Were the Pueblo societies so stressed and its people so irritable that they were more likely to fight?"No, they were stressed and less able to fight," Blinman said. "If the Spanish had come here in 1400 instead, I doubt if they could have succeeded."DetailsEric Blinman lecture, "The King and I: a Non-Lyrical View of the Past, Present, and Future of Global Climate Change," sponsored by the Friends of ArchaeologyNoon Wednesday, Aug. 22New Mexico Film Museum, 418 Montezuma Ave.No chargeGraphic 1. Greenland ice cap where it meets a local fjord2. Left, colloquium participants at a Greenlandarchaeological site that includes the remains of a 14th- to 15th-century church3. A visit to the Gardar archaeological site, a historic Norse settlement that today is a small sheep-raising community.ClassificationLanguage:ÊENGLISHPublication-Type:ÊNewspaperSubject:ÊCLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); FISHES (90%); MAMMALS (90%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (89%); ARCHAEOLOGY (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (88%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); INTERVIEWS (71%)Industry:ÊFINFISH FISHING (89%); AGRICULTURE (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); SHEEP FARMING (78%); FRUITS & VEGETABLES (73%); SHEEP & GOAT FARMING (72%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (71%)Person:ÊCARL XVI GUSTAF, KING OF SWEDEN (76%)Geographic:ÊNEW MEXICO, USA (96%); ALASKA, USA (79%); GREENLAND (95%); DENMARK (79%); SWEDEN (68%)Load-Date:ÊSeptember 3, 2007End of Document| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2021 LexisNexis Page 5 of 5WHAT WOULD DARWIN DO?  