
Sen.-elect Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee said falsely in the lead-up to her campaign that the Earth has started to cool, and argued inaccurately that scientists have not reached a consensus on climate change.
In Florida, which has been pummeled by hurricanes, Sen.-elect Rick Scott has acknowledged rising and warmer seas could be harmful to his state but won’t attribute it to human activity.
And Sen. John Neely Kennedy of Louisiana told reporters last week that while the Earth may be getting hotter, “I’ve seen many persuasive arguments that it’s just a continuation of the warming up from the Little Ice Age.”
As President Donald Trump’s rejection of climate science isolates the United States on the world stage, illustrated by the small U.S. delegation dispatched to this week’s United Nations climate summit in Poland, he has also presided over a transformation in the Republican Party — placing climate change skepticism squarely in the GOP’s ideological mainstream.
Where the last Republican president, George W. Bush, acknowledged that the Earth was warming and that “an increase in greenhouse gases caused by humans is contributing to the problem,” the prevailing GOP view expressed on the campaign trail this year and espoused by many members of Congress is built on the false premise that climate science is an open question.
The small number of voices supporting the science have been largely drowned out.
The House Climate Solutions Caucus, co-founded in 2016 by Rep. Carlos Curbelo, R-Fla., and once thought of as a catalyst for climate-friendly legislation, lost 24 of its 45 Republican members to retirement or election defeat this year — including Curbelo. An analysis by the liberal Center for American Progress Action Fund found that 61 percent of Republicans in Congress have in some way raised doubts about climate change, deflected the question, claimed that the climate is always changing, or questioned the extent to which humans contribute to climate change.
As a result, the two major political parties, which not long ago largely shared a fundamental view on the challenges posed by climate change, are now battling over the credibility of science and facts — a fight that is shaping up as a potentially defining issue of the 2020 presidential campaign.
“There are some things that started to emerge as a consensus, which is Republicans had said the climate is changing, and we’re going to have to do something about it,” said Douglas Holtz-Eakin, who was a top economic adviser to Bush and 2008 Republican presidential nominee John McCain. “The president’s stance makes that harder because he denies it’s even changing .... This puts us back into gridlock again.”
The skeptics’ impact on U.S. policy has been laid bare in recent days. Trump shrugged off his administration’s 1,600-page report outlining the severe threats of climate change. Then, over the weekend, his team secured language in a joint statement issued by Group of 20 leaders over the weekend carving out a separate U.S. position on climate goals and reaffirming the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris climate accord.
That Earth’s temperature is rising is not in dispute among most scientists or other world leaders. A 2013 report that analyzed scientific papers studying climate change found that, of those papers that took a position on the matter, 97 percent endorsed the idea that humans are causing global warming.
The planet has warmed nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit above late 19th-century levels, and scientists say that unless carbon emissions fall sharply in the coming years, the worst consequences of climate change will be unavoidable.
Pope Francis called for a “revolution” to combat climate change, saying the consensus was clear and “doomsday predictions can no longer be met with irony or disdain.”
Downplaying climate change
After the U.S. government released its long-awaited climate assessment on Nov. 23, most Republicans followed Trump’s lead in downplaying the catastrophic warnings of more wildfires and flooding, damage to human health, and a substantial hit to the U.S. economy.
“Our climate always changes, and we see those ebb and flows through time,” Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa, said on CNN’s “State of the Union.”
Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Neb., said that while the report is important, there is too much “alarmism” around climate science.
“I think the real question, though, becomes what do you do about it? Because you can’t legislate or regulate your way into the past,” he said on “Fox News Sunday.” “Right now, you don’t hear a lot of people who put climate as a No. 1 issue, you don’t hear a lot of them offering constructive, innovative solutions for the future — it’s usually just a lot of alarmism.”
Polling suggests there has been movement among the electorate. Nearly two-thirds of Republicans believe the world’s climate is changing, according to a recent Monmouth University survey, a jump from 49 percent three years ago.
Among Democrats, 92 percent say that climate change is occurring — and 82 percent say they consider it “very serious.” Among independents, 78 percent believe in it.
“President Trump is becoming a real caricature of climate disputation,” said Bob Inglis, a former Republican congressman from South Carolina who now runs a group called republicEn that tries to convince conservatives to address climate change. “The public is coming to much greater awareness and understanding of the challenge, and he persists in this basically superstitious denial of the data.”
Inglis said he saw some positive signs in recent days — such as Sen. Thom Tillis, R-N.C., who once denied climate change, calling on both parties to combat it — but also reason for pessimism.
“There’s still disappointments along the way,” Inglis said. “But I think that’s the way it is any time you’re trying to do something very big. Like in civil rights, it was two steps forward, one step back. That’s what we’re dealing with here.”
Few Republicans speak out against skepticism
Several of those questioning the science — including Blackburn and Kennedy — did not respond to requests for comment.
Asked about Scott’s reticence to talk about climate change — he often says, “I’m not a scientist,” and his campaign website’s section on the environment never mentions climate change — a spokesman pointed toward some of his efforts as Florida’s governor.
Scott has supported increased funding for the state Department of Environmental Protection and implemented a $3.6 million program aimed at preparing coastal communities “for the effects of climate change, especially rising sea levels.”
Asked in October whether Hurricane Michael demonstrated the effects of climate change, he appeared to acknowledge that sea temperatures were rising but dismissed the cause as inexplicable.
“Here’s what we know This storm came up really fast. And the waters were hot,” he said. “Do we all know why that happened? None of us know why that happened.”
Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., who has become a staunch Trump ally since running against him for president in 2016, has consistently attempted to push his party to address climate change. He worked in 2010 with then-Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., to try to pass comprehensive climate and energy legislation, an effort that ultimately failed. Graham has endorsed a carbon tax and challenged his party to stop giving credence to the outliers who question the science.
“Here’s a question you need to ask everybody running as a Republican What is the environmental policy of the Republican Party?” Graham said on CNN during his 2016 presidential campaign. “When I ask that question, I get a blank stare.”
Graham did not comment on Trump's response to the recent climate assessment, and he declined a request for an interview on the topic. His spokesman said that his views have not changed.
Sen.-elect Mitt Romney, R-Utah, also has sounded alarms within his party, saying that he believes climate change is happening and that humans are a factor. During his Senate campaign in August, he said the changing climate will make wildfires more common and more dangerous in Utah.
During an address before college students in St. Louis last year, Romney said he was “concerned about the anti-scientific attitude” from members of his party.
“I happen to believe that there is climate change, and I think humans contribute to it in a substantial way, and therefore I look with openness to all the ideas that might be able to address that,” he said. “The idea of doing nothing, in my view, is a recipe for disaster ... it’s going to require presidential leadership.”
But over the past week, Romney has not commented on Trump’s comments or the climate assessment that came out. He declined requests for an interview.

As "moderate" Democrats pretend to be fiscally responsible in their opposition to President Biden's proposed $36 billion budget to combat climate change, I wonder what it means to act responsibly these days. It ought to reflect a good faith effort to save the planet.
Failing to invest in a sustainable planet indicates that we have abandoned their responsibilities as caretakers of the earth. They seem content merely to adapt. This raises the question Is adapting to climate change a responsible or even virtuous quality when life hangs in the balance? Yet, adapting can also have a good spin, suggesting a gritty quality in a person's character. After all, who admires the person who needs coddling when challenged by disaster? Starting in childhood we're taught to have a "good attitude" and are chastised if we complain.
In sustaining a life-changing injury or facing new financial hardships, we admire and try to emulate those who serve as intrepid models. When we feel alone in our grief immediately following the death of a loved one, counselors offer tools to help us move to a "new normal." We're urged to show others the kind of stuff we're made of. It's expected, and we surely would prefer displaying strength of character to grumbling about our misfortunes.
In his 1936 hit song, "Face the Music and Dance," Irving Berlin supports the spirit of adapting. He recommends resisting life's inevitable disasters by dancing, even in the face of danger. The song opens with the ominous line "There's trouble ahead," but then urges us to face the music and dance. The song, in other words, becomes a metaphor for adapting, and all that's required for getting to a new normal is to "hum a different tune." In the face of oncoming trouble, channel your inner Fred or Ginger and glide gracefully into a different reality. No one wants to face the music and sulk.
When it comes to climate change, however, is adapting really the best call? Doesn't adapting imply a willingness to capitulate to corporations fully invested in keeping the status quo? By adapting, we negate technologies and policies already in place that reduce carbon footprints and increase sustainability. A habitable planet does not rely on speculative new technologies, but simply an accelerated implementation of what already exists. Can the price be too great?
We must change the national conversation about climate change. Instead of meekly accepting some inevitably altered earth, we need to use our current and developing knowledge of how to draw down our carbon output. In lieu of adapting, a euphemism for complacency, we are ready now to face the music with alternative energy sources, greater sustainability in building materials, land use management to protect forests and wetlands, eliminating HFC's in refrigeration, and a savvy approach to food systems, knowing that what we eat correlates to what we release into the atmosphere.
Our negligence in allowing climate catastrophe to reach its current level of devastation says more about our hubris than our incompetence. We opt for comfortable lifestyles, holding the illusion that feeble efforts at adapting will buy enough time to forego making the needed concessions in our everyday lives.
Meanwhile, as we teeter precariously on the tipping point of survival, our elected officials are elevating highways and bridges and planting shade trees for cows. Supplying support groups for children who lost their homes in wildfires may appear well-meaning, but it forsakes the substantive issues that deal with the conflagration in the first place. And exactly how high do they plan to build those sea walls?
It is time we confront climate issues directly. Since climate catastrophes in 2020 alone cost us more than $20 billion in damages, how much convincing do we need? Short-term solutions to climate change border on the absurd. After many decades of accumulated violence, the earth has convulsed as would any living organism. It has a score to settle. We cannot face the music in a tone-deaf manner. The world is melting, flooding and on fire. Care to dance?
Mitigating global warming lies within our grasp but it won't be achieved by adapting. A viable future will be a test of our character. No one disputes there's trouble ahead, but if we only intend to adapt, we will dance blithely towards our own extinction. Conversely, if we address the crisis head on, generations to come will honor our legacy. What is the stuff we're made of? When will we begin acting responsibly?
Tom Goldsmith is minister emeritus of the First Unitarian Church, Salt Lake City

Let's face it Solar energy and wind power cannot possibly solve the real problem of global climate change. Those who give credence to that simple-minded solution should have paid attention in basic physics classes.
Can we install enough solar panels and wind turbines to handle our electric power needs? Theoretically, yes. Realistically, no. Because the sun shines only part of the time. And the wind blows only part of the time. That means for every kilowatt of solar energy we develop, we must also provide a kilowatt of traditional energy for standby - hydro, geothermal, coal, oil, or nuclear. And we must not only pay to develop standby energy sources, but we must also pay to keep them ready to generate electricity 24 hours a day. The low cost of solar and wind are not such bargains, after all.
A second reality is transmission. Electricity does not flow in both directions over the same wire. With wind and solar we must have two transmission systems - one to collect the power generated from a million or more sources, and the other to redistribute the power to millions of user locations.
Businesses that claim to operate entirely on so-called "clean energy" are not telling the truth. They may generate enough solar power during daylight hours to supply the business's total 24-hour kilowatt load, but in reality they dump excess solar power onto the grid during the day and then draw upon traditional sources from the grid during nighttime hours.
It's also true that when you move electricity through wires, you lose a few watts along the way. Ask anyone living near a high power transmission line. The longer the transmission distance, the more power is lost.
The laws of physics (and chemistry) apply to batteries, also. Batteries are great for powering telephones, laptops, flashlights and even short-range automobiles. But it is neither possible nor wise to rely on battery power for office buildings, factories, cross-country semis, airplanes, light rail or even homes. Batteries are dangerously flammable, and disposing of them creates horrendous environmental problems. Even now, depleted battery-operated automobiles stack up in some places because it's too dangerous to dismantle them.
Another issue is balancing supply and demand. Solar panels and wind turbines produce energy even when demand goes down. We can turn traditional energy sources up, down or off. Not so with solar and wind. And we can't dump excess electricity onto the ground the way we do with excess water. Already in some locations they have had problems disposing of nighttime wind power no one wants or needs.
Demand for electric energy is likely to double or triple over the next few decades. Today, wind and solar provide a small portion of U.S. power supply - about 10 percent. It's possible (but not probable) that we can increase that to 20, maybe even 30 percent, before the realities detailed above call a halt to more development. Then what?
Climate change is a real problem, worldwide, a critical problem. In order to solve it, we must focus on realistic solutions - not simply in North America but throughout the world. Marching and demonstrating won't help. Instead, young people should concentrate their creative energies and their talents on vital research.
How do we build nuclear energy plants that are smaller and safer? How do we make nuclear waste safe or reusable? Which sources of energy are we overlooking in this energy-rich world? Can we find ways to mimic trees, transforming carbon dioxide and other air pollutants into harmless components?
Focused research - lots of it - has a much better chance of solving the very real problem of climate change than pie-in-the-sky fantasies such as solar power.
Long-time Utah journalist Don Gale recalls many breakthrough technologies that came from creative young minds.
The Environmental Protection Agency published a 150-page document this past week with a straightforward message for coping with the fallout from natural disasters across the country Start planning for the fact that climate change is going to make these catastrophes worse.
The language, included in guidance on how to address the debris left in the wake of floods, hurricanes and wildfires, is at odds with the rhetoric of the EPA’s own leader, Andrew Wheeler. Just last month, Wheeler said in an interview with CBS that “most of the threats from climate change are 50 to 75 years out.”
Multiple recent studies have identified how climate change is already affecting the United States and the globe. In the western United States, for example, regional temperatures have increased by almost 2 degrees Fahrenheit since the 1970s, and snowmelt is occurring a month earlier in areas, extending the fire season by three months and quintupling the number of large fires. Another scientific paper, co-authored by EPA researchers, found that unless the United States slashes carbon emissions, climate change will probably cost the United States hundreds of billions of dollars annually by 2100.
The divergence between Wheeler and his own agency offers the latest example of the often contradictory way that federal climate policy has evolved under President Donald Trump. As the White House has sought to minimize or ignore climate science, government experts have continued to sound the alarm.
The president has said he intends to withdraw the nation from a key international climate accord, but last fall 13 agencies issued a report concluding that "the evidence of human-caused climate change is overwhelming and continues to strengthen, that the impacts of climate change are intensifying across the country, and that climate-related threats to Americans' physical, social, and economic well-being are rising."
The White House has repeatedly sought ways to question the broad scientific consensus that human activities are driving climate change, and it is considering creating a federal advisory panel to reexamine those findings. But while the National Security Council is still pursuing the task force proposal, it has encountered resistance from military and intelligence officials as well as the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Even some of the administration's symbolic efforts to change the government's climate message have fizzled. In the summer of 2017, top EPA officials had plans to tweak references to climate change in the agency's official museum, and possibly to put a piece of coal on display. The overhaul plans stalled and are now not expected to materialize, according to two individuals who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.
Still, Trump officials often home in on references to climate change in key documents.
In the case of April 24 guidance from the EPA's Office of Land and Emergency Management, documents show, the White House's Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs sought to downplay climate change's impact on the intensity of natural disasters. But these efforts, first reported by E&E News, did not entirely remove those references.
The document published Wednesday in the Federal Register repeatedly makes the link between climate change and more-severe floods, wildfires and storms.
While the White House struck one phrase attributing extreme weather events to climate change, the document still refers to "climate change" and "a changing climate" 22 times.
"According to the 2014 National Climate Assessment, which is a detailed report on climate change impacts on the U.S., climate change is expected to increase the frequency and intensity of some natural disasters," it states. "The amount of debris generated by natural disasters, and the costs to manage it, will likely increase as a result."
The guidance is directed toward "communities at increased risk from natural disasters due to climate change," according to the document, which included a section titled "Incorporate Climate Change Adaptation into Debris Management Planning."
Asked about the document Friday, the EPA declined to comment.
"This EPA guidance is clearly telling the public you need to start dealing now with disasters that are being made worse by climate change and will be made even worse due to climate change," said Amit Narang, regulatory policy advocate at the group Public Citizen. "It's pretty troubling to me to see the head of EPA saying the exact opposite thing."
To some extent, the new document reflects the advances scientists have made attributing extreme events to climate change since a landmark analysis was published in 2004 looking at a deadly European heat wave the year before.
The U.S. government’s main climate change website, climate.gov, features a detailed explanation of how the science has evolved in recent years, including how federal researchers have contributed to the field.
"Scientists are increasingly able to distinguish evidence of human-induced climate change from natural variability," according to the government explainer.
But the research into extreme event attribution is hardly limited to the government. Since 2011, the American Meteorological Society has compiled an annual assessment of how human-caused climate change probably affected the strength and frequency of extreme events such as record heat waves, droughts and wildfires.
The group has said that of the more than 130 peer-reviewed studies published as part of the annual reviews, about 65% have identified the fingerprints of climate change in extreme weather events, while about 35% found no clear connection.
"The science has really developed in the last decade, in particular, around the influence of global warming on extreme events," said Noah Diffenbaugh, a professor and senior fellow at Stanford University who studies the climate system.
For starters, he said, researchers are constantly gathering more data and studying more weather events, so that the observational record has grown over time. Computing power and modeling capabilities have improved. And there also has been an "explosion of research" on the topic, as scientists have developed frameworks for better evaluating the role of climate change in specific events.
The result, he said, is a growing body of research that details how human-caused climate change is contributing to record heat, more-intense storms, more-severe flooding and other events.
"It's very clear from multiple lines of evidence that we are already being impacted by the global warming that's already happened," Diffenbaugh said.
During Wheeler's confirmation hearing early this year, Democrats repeatedly tried to pin down Wheeler, who has lobbied in the past for the fossil fuel industry, about exactly where he stands on climate change and the risks it poses.
Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., pressed Wheeler about whether he agreed with Trump's comment that climate change amounted to a Chinese "hoax." After being pressed, the acting administrator replied, "I have not used the 'hoax' word myself."
Sanders then asked Wheeler whether he accepts the consensus of most scientists that climate change is one of the most serious problems facing the nation. “I would not call it the greatest crisis, no, sir,” he replied. “I would call it a huge issue that needs to be addressed globally.”
A drought scorched the Great Plains, causing wildfires and $2.5 billion in agriculture losses. Catastrophic floods submerged more than a third of Bangladesh. Record-shattering heat waves killed scores of people in Europe and China.
These were among 15 extreme weather events in 2017 that were made more likely by human-caused climate change, according to in-depth studies published this week in the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. At least one episode — a devastating marine heat wave off the coast of Australia that cooked ecosystems and damaged fisheries — would have been “virtually impossible” without human influence, scientists said.
The findings, presented Monday at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, underscore the degree to which climate change is already harming human society, researchers said.
"People used to talk about climate change as a very complex and difficult problem of the future — something that would happen in places far away and on long time scales," said Jeff Rosenfeld, the Bulletin's editor in chief. "But hurricanes and wildfires and bleaching and drought . . . they're happening to us right now, and we face new and challenging risks of how they're going to affect us in the future."
The Bulletin has published an "Explaining Extremes" report, which seeks to determine which weather events can be attributed to climate change, every year since 2011. This is the second consecutive year that scientists have identified an event that could not have happened without human-induced warming.
This year's report features 17 peer-reviewed analyses of 16 disasters by 120 researchers looking at weather across six continents and two oceans. Each study uses historical records and model simulations to determine how much climate change may have influenced a particular event.
A study of the record-breaking heat wave that devastated Europe and the Mediterranean in 2017 found that such events are now three times as likely as they were in 1950. The chance of such an event recurring in any given summer is now 10 percent. In China and Bangladesh, climate change made deadly flooding twice as probable. And a drought in East Africa that left 6 million people in Somalia facing food shortages was caused by dramatic ocean warming that could not have occurred without humans' impact on the environment.
Ocean warming played a role in several of the events examined, Rosenfeld said.
"If there's anything that's disturbing -" he said, cutting himself off with a wry laugh. "Well, everything is disturbing.
"But what I mean is that if there's something that has changed in these studies, one of them is that the connections are more apparent between the ocean and land," Rosenfeld continued. "The ocean has its warming temper tantrums just like the weather overland does."
This runs counter to a popular image of the ocean as a vast global warming buffer, capable of taking up huge amounts of additional carbon that humans have added to the global system.
"The fact that we're seeing the oceans as a link in a chain of causes that ultimately tie human causes to extreme weather events on land means the ocean is not just there to keep us from being bothered by climate change," Rosenfeld said. "Quite the opposite. The ocean is actively playing a role in the extremes that we're seeing."
The studies in the report don't represent a comprehensive analysis of all extreme weather in 2017. Stephanie Herring, a meteorologist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, who was lead editor of the report, said that the examined events were selected for diversity in type and location. None of the researchers involved knew whether they would discover a climate link when they began work on the report.
Only one of the studies — a look at wildfires in Australia — did not find a role for climate change.
Martin Hoerling, a NOAA scientist and co-editor of the report, said "the human fingerprint is more evident" than when the Bulletin began quantifying climate change influence on extreme weather seven years ago. The warmer Earth's average temperature gets, the more scientists are seeing how sensitive weather is to the change. "The climate of Earth keeps moving further and further from the world which many of us, and certainly our parents, were initially accustomed to," Hoerling said.
Scientists have traditionally been wary of blaming any individual event on climate change. The global climate is a complex system, and the consequences of humans pumping atmospheric greenhouse gas levels to nearly twice their preindustrial average can be difficult to disentangle. Most conversations about climate's impact did not get more specific than global averages and seasonal shifts.
But thanks to improved data collection and increasingly sophisticated climate models, researchers can see the influence of climate change on specific disasters, such as six days of rain over northeast Bangladesh.
"It is now possible, with confidence, to determine how much an extreme weather event has been affected by human activities," Hoerling said. "It is a key step toward better understanding the economic consequence of climate change, since extreme events are often associated with the most dire losses in property and life."
The growing field of "attribution science" is as much about the future as it is about the past, Herring said. If scientists can determine how much climate change contributed to a particular extreme event, they can also predict the likelihood of the event repeating in years to come.
"If we don't have good science about how extremes are changing," Herring said, "then we can't be engaged in the conversation about how to manage the risk."
"If something was a 500-year flood but research shows it's now going to be a 200-year flood, that changes a lot of things," Herring said. "It affects infrastructure; it changes how communities and societies make investment choices."
The Explaining Extremes report also includes perspectives from public officials and legal experts on the consequences of these shifting risks. Julie Vano, a researcher at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, noted how extreme weather exposes weaknesses in infrastructure and resource management. The Oroville Dam in California, which had been built according to projections that did not account for climate change, was damaged and nearly overflowed after the region was hit with historic heavy rainfall. During Hurricane Harvey, a storm that scientists say was worsened by climate change, water managers told Vano they were unprepared for catastrophic flooding because the event was so unlike anything they'd seen before.
These studies might also find their way into courtrooms, according to Lindene Patton, an attorney with the Earth and Water Law Group. Scientists' increased confidence in the link between climate change and extreme events means that such events are foreseeable, which means that utilities, developers and other groups can be held liable for being unprepared.
"This science is going to change our obligations not just as scientists but also as social actors," Patton said.
For people who are interested in learning how climate change is altering their environment, Hoerling has a very direct explanation.
“It is making weather worse and creating a more hostile environment for thriving,” Hoerling said. From the Arctic, where sea ice is shrinking, to coastal regions, where storm surge is higher, to heat waves in urban centers, where some lack the means to stay cool, the list of ways climate change is affecting us, Hoerling says, “is lengthy.”
The Salt Lake Tribune, in a Sept. 3 Associated Press article, soft-pedaled the catastrophic impacts of global warming, choosing a weak quote about Hurricane Ida's devastating floodwaters "experts" said the storm's power was "slightly exacerbated by climate change."
We need far stronger language if we hope to face the crisis engulfing us.
How did other media cover this climate change-fueled disaster? The New York Times' bold-faced subhead pulled no punches "A huge volume of rain overwhelmed the region's infrastructure, showing the lethal impact of climate change."
The Washington Post ran a story titled "How climate change helped make Hurricane Ida one of Louisiana's worst."
In USA Today I had to read to the sixth paragraph to find New Jersey Congressman Tom Malinowski's warning "The disaster should be a wake-up call. Anybody who believes that it's too expensive to stop climate change ... has got to wake up to the fact that we cannot afford not to."
Then, I looked at Fox News. A single polarizing line noted that President Biden "blamed" Ida's strength on climate change. On the Fox home page later that day, climate change was not even mentioned in a brief story on the storm.
Language matters. We can only force elected officials to act by repeatedly hammering home the peril we face right now. Every story about forests in flames, about deadly flooding and heat domes, about the aridification of the desert West, must lead with climate change. Every day we fail to take transformative action guarantees a more dismal future for millions of human beings.
We need the power of the press more than ever before. Every writer and media outlet shares in the responsibility to educate and mobilize readers. Every story that fails to foreground climate change as our existential threat makes the world a more dangerous and calamitous place.
Stephen Trimble, Torrey



Page 18 of 18Letter When it comes to dealing with climate change, language matters


 


 

