
Guest Opinion
 In a recent guest opinion ("Local climate activists' rhetoric comes up short on action," June 30), the Washington Policy Center complains about 350 Spokane's efforts to make our city part of climate solutions. We want to make clear that we are very much in favor of hydro, wind, solar and geo-thermal - whatever it takes to quickly quit fossil fuels, as science says we must. We believe in listening to the warnings of experts and taking seriously the extreme changes we are already seeing in our climate.
 Yet why didn't the WPC mention its long, deep funding by the oil, gas and coal industry, including the Koch brothers and the American Petroleum Institute? As we saw in their article, that industry's latest tactic is to try to divert attention from the need to phase out these fossil fuels by promoting "carbon offsets," which are basically expensive licenses to pollute. Do we really want to license billionaires to fly climate-killing private jets between their mansions in Texas and Bali? Not when hundreds of millions of lives and the global economy are at stake. Purchasing carbon offsets simply allows rich people to pretend they are doing something about the crisis. It allows them to pay others to take action, thus giving them an excuse not to do anything.
 Last October, the global climate science consensus from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said the climate crisis is far worse than we thought even four years ago. At that time, the whole world agreed in Paris to halt warming at 2 degrees Celsius above levels from 150 years ago. Now the world's top climate scientists warn us to halt warming at 1.5 degrees Celsius in order to avoid many of the disasters we thought lay beyond 2 degrees. They also tell us that this means halving carbon emissions by 2030 and eliminating them by 2050.
 That is why we now call this the climate crisis. Let's deal with it before our kids call it the climate catastrophe.
 We think Spokane has a vital role to play in this, which is why we helped the city commit to 100% clean electricity (and why we are now ashamed of Mayor Condon's illegal obstruction of that important ordinance). Although we cannot stop the wildfires and choking smoke that climate change has already brought, we can still prevent much worse disasters ahead: miles-wide firestorms, submerged cities, spreading deserts, uninhabitable regions, crop collapses, mega-hurricanes, refugees destabilizing countries everywhere, and widespread warfare as a result of these horrific stresses.
 There are many things we can and are working to do, individually and collectively, to help reduce the impacts of our climate crisis. Individually, we need to reduce our dependence on fossil-fuel-demanding transportation. The transportation sector is the largest single contributor to carbon emissions in the state of Washington. Commuting by bicycle, public transit, or purchasing a hybrid or electric car are good ways to reduce your carbon emissions. Collectively, we need to urge our state and national elected officials to pass legislation that will end our reliance on coal and methane to generate electricity. Joining a group, like 350 Spokane, which is working to reduce the impacts of the climate crisis, is another way to take collective action.
 350 Spokane believes it is extremely important to couple climate action with spreading its costs to the rich who pollute the most, while providing jobs and financial assistance to the bottom half who face the hardest burdens in adjusting to a fossil-free world. But the rich are not going to get off the hook by simply purchasing carbon indulgences offsets.
 Let's prepare Spokane, our country and our world for a cleaner, more prosperous future. And let's be unsurprised when oil company mouthpieces try to divert us from the need to leave their poisons in the ground.
ON DISPLAY
AN OCCASIONAL SERIES ABOUT SPOKANE-CENTRIC THINGS FOUND IN MUSEUMS AROUND THE COUNTRY
CHICAGO - Walking through the Field Museum's Evolving Planet exhibit, a museum visitor can see how the world has changed during the last 4.5 billion years.
There's SUE the T-rex, the museum's most famous dinosaur fossil. There are replicas of early humans. And there's everything in between.
A stop in the Ice Age exhibit reveals woolly mammoth paintings and a mastodon skeleton. Standing right next to it, at about 13 feet tall, is a mammoth skeleton that with its two large tusks and long legs looks an awful lot like a modern-day elephant.
But the history of this mammoth is a little bit more complicated. And it started in Spokane County.
The large bones of four different mammoths found in Latah have been on display, mounted into one skeleton, at the Field Museum in Chicago for nearly 100 years. At the time, it was one of very few mammoth skeletons to exist.
Paleontologists have now identified mammoth and mastodon skeletons across the country, but Spokane County's legacy still stands tall in Chicago.
And as some researchers hope to slow the climate crisis by bringing back the woolly mammoth, looking back at the history of these creatures is more important now than ever.
"Because this specimen has been mounted for so long, people can see and visualize what these creatures looked like," said Bill Simpson, head of geological collections at the Field Museum in Chicago.
The journey to bring the bones to Chicago was a long one, especially since their discovery predates the creation of the Field Museum.
More than 120 bones from four mammoths were found during an excavation in 1876 on a marshy hollow owned by the Coplen family in Latah, according to a 2001 thesis by Charles Luttrell at Eastern Washington University. The Coplen family was the first settlers to claim the land.
There were three jaws, six tusks, dozens of vertebrae, ribs, skulls, feet and more from four mammoths, according to a Chicago Academy of Science bulletin from 1886.
In total, the bones weighed about 700 pounds, according to the bulletin.
Upon discovering the bones, the Coplen brothers took them on an exhibition road trip from Colfax to Dayton to Walla Walla, according to Luttrell's research. They were later shipped via Columbia River steamer to multiple destinations in Oregon.
After the exhibitions, the bones were temporarily kept at Pacific University in Oregon, according to the thesis. About five years later, the Chicago Academy of Science bought the bones for $350.
In 1893, the mammoth was put on display at the World's Columbia Exposition in Chicago, as part of Washington State's world's fair display. Twenty years later in 1914, it was sold to the Field Museum in Chicago for $500. It was not put on display in the museum, however, until its new building was completed in 1920.
Since then, the museum has remounted, restored and reassembled the skeleton multiple times.
The bones are what scientists now consider Mammuthus columbi, or the now-extinct North American elephant. Although closely related to woolly mammoths and more distantly related to mastodons, the North American elephant likely looked a lot like today's Asian or African elephants, Simpson said.
It's hard to determine exactly how old the bones are, but Simpson estimated they're somewhere between 10,000 and 50,000 years old. The bones are from the late-Pleistocene age, which ended just 10,000 years ago - a very short amount of time in a geological sense, Simpson said.
Paleontologists don't yet have a good understanding of why many species went extinct.
"It's not an easy question because we aren't there to see it," Simpson said.
Some explanations could be a changing climate or introduction of new illnesses or disease.
WHAT BRINGING BACK THE MAMMOTH COULD DO
A group of scientists announced last month they were starting a company, called Colossal, to attempt to bring back the woolly mammoth using a process known as de-extinction.
Colossal, which has received $15 million in initial funding, will support biologist George Church's research, according to the New York Times. Church and his researchers have experimented with adding genes for mammoth traits, such as dense hair and thick fat, and now hope to produce embryos of mammoths.
The process will "slow the long term impacts of human-induced loss of biodiversity," according to Colossal's website. The idea is that de-extinction, bringing animals back to their original habitat, can begin reversing climate damage.
The process starts by collecting DNA from modern-day elephants and viable mammoth tissue samples from woolly mammoth fossils. They then identify which traits in the modern-day elephant DNA to edit and which cold-resistant traits in woolly mammoth samples they hope to recreate. They then take elephant DNA and place cold-resistant characteristics into it.
Their hope is to then take the new embryo and implant it into a surrogate elephant, which researchers hope can then give birth to a woolly mammoth.
Making modern-day elephants cold-adapted could also be one way to save the endangered species because it could allow them to live in colder habitats, Simpson said. It could also slow global warming.
When mammoths roamed in cold areas, their ecosystem was rich in grasses as they trampled any trees in the area, Simpson said. Without large trees, the cold air was able to hit the ground and keep it cold in the winter. Bringing elephants back into these cold habitats could keep the permafrost from melting, Simpson said.
That could be done with slightly altering existing elephants, not necessarily bringing back woolly mammoths. The de-extinction and gene-altering of woolly mammoths remains controversial.
"Maybe we can," Simpson said. "But should we?"
'DETERMINING WHO'S RELATED TO WHOM'
The mounted skeleton in the Field Museum's Evolving Planet exhibit is made up of the bones of four different mammoths found in Latah. Most of it is real bones, but some of it, including the skull, the feet and one tusk, are recreations.
This skeleton was one of the first to be discovered and mounted.
In early documents, it was described as one of only two or three in the country.
Now, there are many more mammoth and mastodon skeletons found and still being discovered, Simpson said.
Only 0.5% of specimens the Field Museum owns is on display at any time, said Simpson, who's worked there for 42 years.
Most of what they own they've collected themselves, he added, and most of it was collected for research purposes to learn more about how the world has changed and where we come from.
For example, in original documents describing the mammoth skeleton, it was described as an Elaphas primigenius, a woolly mammoth.
But after decades of research, Simpson now knows that it's actually a Mammuthus columbi, or a Columbian mammoth very closely related to modern-day elephants.
"That's the bread and butter of what we do: determining who's related to whom," Simpson said.
People are just generally curious about where humans come from, Simpson said, and places like the Field Museum and skeletons like that of the Latah mammoths help them learn more.
More than 350 Amazon employees defied a company ban on unapproved external communications to call out what they see as the retail and technology giant's still-inadequate approach to the climate crisis.
 In a Medium post and news release Sunday and video released online Monday, the employees praised the steps that Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos committed the company to last September, but railed against what one called Amazon's "unconscionable" business with the oil and gas industry. They also objected to an updated external communications policy, provided to employees in September, a day after the Amazon Employees for Climate Justice group announced plans for a walkout as part of the Global Climate Strike. They called the policy a "reprehensible overreach" and asserted a "moral responsibility" to speak out on climate.
 Earlier this month, members of Amazon Employees for Climate Justice said Amazon had threatened to fire at least two outspoken employees for violating the external communications policy, in what many of them view as a crackdown on dissent within the corporate ranks.
 Undeterred by the apparent risk to their jobs with one of the world's most valuable companies, hundreds of employees signed their names and titles to pointed critiques and calls for change.
 In the Medium post, they praised the steps Amazon has taken so far - particularly an order for 100,000 electric delivery vans - but said the company's commitment to being carbon neutral by 2040 is not enough and doesn't befit Amazon's size, consumer influence and leadership in its various industries.
 So far, no Amazon workers appear to have been fired as a result of violating the external communications policy. Amazon, in response to inquiries, reiterated its policy, which requires prior approval for communications about the company.
 Amazon began updating the policy last spring, as a barrage of proposals - including one championed by employees related to Amazon's then-lack of emissions disclosures - came before shareholders at the company's annual meeting. The updated policy, the company said, requires approval from fewer people with less seniority to ease participation in speeches and media interviews.

The majority of the world is convinced that humans are changing the climate, for the worse. Now, evidence is mounting that paints just how grim a future we are making for ourselves and the planet. We will experience more extreme weather events, including hurricanes and droughts, mass extinctions and severe food shortages globally.
 The world's leading group of climate-change experts, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, has issued its most recent report after a five-day meeting last week in Yokohama, Japan. The IPCC, over 1,800 scientists from around the world, collects, analyzes and synthesizes the best, solid science on climate and related fields. The prognosis is not good.
 At the news conference announcing the report, IPCC chairperson Rajendra Pachauri warned, "If the world doesn't do anything about mitigating the emissions of greenhouse gases and the extent of climate change continues to increase, then the very social stability of human systems could be at stake."
 Pachauri speaks with the discipline of a scientist and the reserve of a diplomat. The latest report, though, states clearly: "Climate change can indirectly increase risks of violent conflicts in the form of civil war and inter-group violence." It stresses how the world food supply, already experiencing stress, will be impacted, and those who are most vulnerable will be the first to go hungry. But the problem is even larger.
 The IPCC's previous comprehensive report came out in 2007. Since that time, the amount of scientific findings has doubled, making human-induced climate change an irrefutable fact. But there are still powerful deniers, funded by the fossil-fuel industry. Oxfam, a global anti-hunger campaign organization, also is challenging the deniers with a report released last week called "Hot and hungry - how to stop climate change derailing the fight against hunger." Oxfam's Tim Gore says that "corporations like Exxon, the powerful economic interests that are currently profiting from our high-carbon economic model ... stand to lose the most from a transition to a low-carbon, fair alternative." Undaunted, ExxonMobil issued its own report following the IPCC's this week, asserting that climate policies are "highly unlikely" to stop it from producing and selling fossil fuels in the near future.
 Fossil-fuel corporations like ExxonMobil exert enormous influence over climate-change policy, especially in the United States. The U.S. House of Representatives this week passed a measure that would effectively force the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and related bodies to ignore climate change, focusing instead on forecasting severe weather, but not its likely causes.
 Meanwhile, at the state level, the Tennessee Senate passed a bill banning investment in certain forms of public transit.
 According to ThinkProgress, the measure received critical funding from the billionaire Republican oil barons Charles and David Koch. The political influence of people like the Kochs will likely become more direct, with the U.S. Supreme Court's decision to eliminate personal contribution caps to candidates in its ruling in the case of McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission.
 One of the IPCC report authors, Bangladeshi climate scientist Saleemul Huq, put it this way on the "Democracy Now!" news hour: "Fossil-fuel companies ... are the drug suppliers to the rest of the world who are junkies and are hooked on fossil fuels. But we don't have to remain hooked on fossil fuels. We are going to have to cut ourselves off from them if we want to see a real transition and prevent temperature rises up to 4 degrees Celsius (7.2 degrees Fahrenheit)."
 That is the crux of the crisis: The major polluting nations are obstructing a binding global agreement to combat climate change. They have agreed, in principle, with the rest of the world, at the United Nations climate negotiations, to limit greenhouse-gas emissions to levels that would allow a global temperature increase of only 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit). But the science says that goal is quickly slipping away and that we are facing a 4-degree increase.
 Princeton professor Michael Oppenheimer, another IPCC report co-author, told me: "It's not just a problem for the rest of the world ... think about Hurricane Sandy. Think about how hard it was to deal with that storm. That's today's storms. Think about what happens over the next 10, 20, 30 years, when sea level goes up and the storms get worse."
 "America is addicted to oil," President George W. Bush, himself a failed oilman, famously said at his State of the Union address in 2006. The U.S. political establishment is swimming in fossil-fuel money, which is drowning democracy. Change will come from grass-roots organizing, from movements like students pushing their university endowments to divest from fossil-fuel corporations, from local communities fighting against fracking and from the growing nonviolent direct-action campaign to block the Keystone XL pipeline.



We know that forest fires have been burning bigger and hotter, summer after summer.
Now research shows they're also burning higher - destroying forests in the upper elevations of the Mountain West that used to stay too cool and wet to burn, even at summer's peak. Not only has this expanded the amount of land at risk of wildfire, but it has fed a vicious cycle that deepens the drought crisis, by reducing the forest structures that typically hold onto snowpack deep into the year and fostering warmer streams at higher elevations.
This unseasonably sweltering week was the perfect time to consider what's coming in the next couple of months. Weather isn't climate, of course - just as the continued existence of snow does not disprove global warming, neither do a few unseasonably hot days alone prove it.
And yet the record heat, along with widespread drought conditions, offered a nice, sweaty opportunity to revisit the state of the climate crisis and to remember what's probably on the horizon: another destructive wildfire season.
For more than a decade, the trend has been stark: more acres burned, more homes destroyed, more horrible air quality days every summer. Recent research indicates only more of the same on the horizon.
A new global analysis by the World Meteorological Association, released in April, shows 2020 was one of the three hottest years on record, even though there was a "cooling La Niña event." That year also concluded the warmest decade yet recorded.
Regional research bears out this trend. New calculations by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration show that Spokane's 30-year average temperature increased 0.4 degrees since the last analysis a decade ago. The increases were sharpest in the summer months, where average temperatures increased by around 1 degree, depending on the month.
It's new information, but it's also very familiar. We've seen this happening for a long time now.
Meanwhile, anyone who treated the pandemic with sanity and seriousness has to be even more concerned about our ability to respond to this crisis - or any crisis that requires a collective response to a collective problem, so long as a politicized minority remains at war with factual knowledge.
The new research about fires burning higher in the mountains contains a rebuttal to denial arguments, and especially to the idea that these smoky, destructive summers are chiefly the result of not enough logging.
Because the latest data focuses on the upper reaches of mountain ranges that are not affected by logging or the lack of it, the findings are even more directly tied to warming.
"While some people focus on historical fire suppression and other forest management practices as reasons for the West's worsening fire problem, these high-elevation forests have had little human intervention," according to a news release by the authors announcing the research. "The results provide a clear indication that climate change is enabling these normally wet forests to burn."
A team of climate scientists and engineers published the study in late May in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, demonstrating that forest fires have been climbing upward at unprecedented rates.
Researchers analyzed all fires larger than 1,000 acres in the West between 1984 and 2017. They found that, while the amount of land burned in these fires grew at every elevation level, the starkest change was above 8,200 feet. (For perspective, Mount Spokane's elevation is 5,887 feet).
The acreage burned above 8,200 feet more than tripled between the early years of that survey (1984-2000) and the later ones (2001-17). Most of these areas are remote mountains and forests, with some small towns and ski areas.
"Our results show that climate warming has diminished the high-elevation flammability barrier - the point where forests historically were too wet to burn regularly because the snow normally lingered well into summer and started falling again early in the fall," the authors said. "Fires advanced about 826 feet uphill in the Western mountains over those three decades."
That has resulted in an expansion of more than 31,000 square miles of "fire territory in the West," the researchers said.
"That means a staggering 11% of all Western U.S. forests - an area similar in size to South Carolina - are susceptible to fire now that weren't three decades ago."
Fires at high elevations damage the ability of mountains to operate as the region's "water towers" - holding snowpack and providing a sustained source of water through the summer. Burn scars reduce the amount of snow that accumulates, and the loss of trees eliminates the foliage that anchors and stabilizes snowpack. The loss of tree canopy exposes mountain streams to the sun, warming up headwater streams.
It's just one more piece of a very large body of evidence telling us what's happening with these massive wildfires.
The only real question is whether we pay attention.


Guest Opinion
 Horizons already are cloudy. Wildfires from Canada are inundating Spokane skies with smoke. How do we make sense of it all?
 The Fourth Annual Climate Assessment offers an able explanation. That interagency governmental report should silence the climate-crisis skeptics among us. As we head into summer, a glance back might be useful.
 Three record-breaking years of wildfires have frazzled everyone in our neck of the Northwest. The three months from June 1 through Aug. 31, 2015, proved to be the hottest, the driest, and the fiercest on record in Spokane. At our international airport, we received a mere 0.44 inch of rain in those months in 2015. The average for June through August is 2.48 inches.
 Glancing back to 1902, we find the Yacolt Complex burn near Mount St. Helens ravaged 370 square miles. It reigned as the largest in state history for a century. In 2014, however, the 391-square-mile Carlton Complex of wildfires near Brewster and Pateros outstripped the Yacolt, destroying 353 homes and causing $100 million in damage. The very next year, the Okanogan Complex on the Colville Reservation surpassed both the Yacolt and the Carlton, scorching a total of 400 square miles.
 Numb from these blunt numbers yet?
 Then consider the word "smoke-bird" that is coming into currency. It names a person who migrates far from home to escape the wildfire season. One who flies to evade bad air. Climate change coins new words.
 Smell and taste entwine so far, in mammalian heads like ours, that we are ingesting wildfire smoke. Gases and particulates cause throats to catch, eyes to stream, lungs to cough up stuff. Pine resins lodge in heads.
 Mountain air turns murky for days, reducing visibility to hundreds of yards. "Apocalyptic," some sufferers mutter. Peering out windows, they witness a gloom whose only frame of reference is the world's end. Our annual wildfires signal a climate in calamity, a dehydrating globe.
 As part of this global climate crisis, more than 700 Northwest glaciers are shrinking fast, says Mauri Pelto. He studied glaciation for three decades on the slopes of Mount Rainier, the most heavily glaciated peak in the lower 48 states. Now he directs the North Cascades Glacier Climate Project. Each new summer drought erodes 5% to 10% of regional ice-field volumes.
 Signature glaciers around the Northwest are punier now than at any time in the past 4,000 years, Pelto shows. Formerly frozen ancient forests are coming to light as millennia-old ice pulls back. Locked-in carbon comes unlocked to wreak more havoc on the atmosphere. Glacier National Park's name might soon be a sad misnomer, an irony of a climate changing fast.
 Nor are climate disruptions confined to the Northwest. Marine windstorms are devastating in proportions never seen before. Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Sandy in 2012, and Harvey, Irma and Maria in 2017 all offer tragic reminders of the growing jeopardy to everyone.
 Dozens perished in Sandy, hundreds in Harvey, thousands in Katrina and Maria. The needy have always gotten hit the hardest. The poor have always taken it on the chin.
 Some deniers insist there's no need for alarm, that such storms are "500-year events," even "1,000-year events." Never mind the fluke that five such storms should make landfall in 12 years. Extreme weather is the new norm, and the norm is a downward sliding scale.
 The topic of the climate crisis causes fights. My insurance agent grew testy when I gave my opinion, even though his industry has the most to lose. Citizens on the right side of the voting aisle become combative if one suggests we throttle back our carbon emissions. One honest economist told me, "We can't afford to address climate change!"
 Other deniers blame environmentalists for the crisis by claiming that logging rollbacks are the cause. Or by rallying behind the 3% of scientific beards who claim that Homo sapiens is not contributing to the climate crisis. Or by blustering that the climate is changing this rapidly on its own. Market-generated counter-science is encouraging them.
 What a flock of ostriches.
 Anyone who says he knows more than "97% ... of actively publishing climate scientists" ought to cite their sources, as we in higher education say. Cite your sources and show your professional credentials.
 I'm no scientist and I don't play one on TV. I prefer to let NASA, NOAA and other credentialed specialists guide our public policy.
  is an Eastern Washington University professor of English who specializes in the interdisciplinary environmental humanities.



Page 19 of 19Wildfires signal climate in calamity


 


 

