Extreme rainfall and flooding left paths of destruction through communities around the world this summer. The latest was in Tennessee, where preliminary data shows a record-shattering 17 inches of rain fell in 24 hours, turning creeks into rivers that flooded hundreds of homes and killed at least 18 people.
A lot of people are asking: Was it climate change? Answering that question isn't so simple.
There has always been extreme weather, but human-caused global warming can increase extreme weather's frequency and severity. For example, research shows that human activities such as burning fossil fuels are unequivocally warming the planet, and we know from basic physics that warm air can hold more moisture.
A decade ago, scientists weren't able to confidently connect any individual weather event to climate change, even though the broader climate change trends were clear. Today, attribution studies can show whether extreme events were affected by climate change and whether they can be explained by natural variability alone. With rapid advances from research and increasing computing power, extreme event attribution has become a burgeoning new branch of climate science.
The latest attribution study, released Aug. 23, looked at the rainfall from the European storm that killed more than 220 people when floods swept through Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands in July.
A team of climate scientists with the group World Weather Attribution analyzed the record-breaking storm, dubbed Bernd, focusing on two of the most severely affected areas. Their analysis found that human-induced climate change made a storm of that severity between 1.2 and 9 times more likely than it would have been in a world 1.2 degrees Celsius (2.1 F) cooler. The planet has warmed just over 1 C since the industrial era began.
Similar studies haven't yet been conducted on the Tennessee storm, but they likely will be.
So, how do scientists figure this out? As an atmospheric scientist, I have been involved in attribution studies. Here's how the process works:
How do attribution studies work?
Attribution studies usually involve four steps.
The first step is to define the event's magnitude and frequency based on observational data. For example, the July rainfall in Germany and Belgium broke records by large margins. The scientists determined that in today's climate, a storm like that would occur on average every 400 years in the wider region.
The second step is to use computers to run climate models and compare those models' results with observational data. To have confidence in a climate model's results, the model needs to be able to realistically simulate such extreme events in the past and accurately represent the physical factors that help these events occur.
The third step is to define the baseline environment without climate change - essentially create a virtual world of Earth as it would be if no human activities had warmed the planet. Then run the same climate models again.
The differences between the second and third steps represent the impact of human-caused climate change. The last step is to quantify these differences in the magnitude and frequency of the extreme event, using statistical methods.
For instance, we analyzed how Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 and a unique weather pattern interacted with each other to produce the record-breaking rainstorm in Texas. Two attribution studies found that human-caused climate change increased the probability of such an event by roughly a factor of three, and increased Harvey's rainfall by 15%.
Another study determined that the western North American extreme heat in late June would have been virtually impossible without human-caused climate change.
How good are attribution studies?
The accuracy of attribution studies is affected by uncertainties associated with each of the above four steps.
Some types of events lend themselves to attribution studies better than others. For instance, among long-term measurements, temperature data is most reliable. We understand how human-caused climate change affects heat waves better than other extreme events. Climate models are also usually skillful in simulating heat waves.
Even for heat waves, the impact of human-caused climate change on the magnitude and frequency could be quite different, such as the case of the extraordinary heat wave across western Russia in 2010. Climate change was found to have had minimal impact on the magnitude, but substantial impact on the frequency.
There can also be legitimate differences in the methods underpinning different attribution studies.
However, people can make decisions for the future without knowing everything with certainty. Even when planning a backyard barbecue, one does not have to have all the weather information.
During the 1980s and '90s in Cheyenne, I would often see Yellow Warblers and Wilson's Warblers in my backyard during migration. Now, I'm lucky to see just a couple a year.
Wyoming's abundant wildlife is one of the things I cherish most about our state, but our birds are in trouble. And when our birds are in trouble, we should pay attention.
A new study from the National Audubon Society shows that North American birds are more vulnerable than ever from rising temperatures and climate-related events like droughts, fires and extreme weather. Audubon's study found that 124 out of 217 of Wyoming's bird species that were analyzed stand to lose more of their summer range across North America than they would gain under a warming climate.
Wyoming icons such as Greater Sage-Grouse, Lark Buntings and Mountain Bluebirds are among the species found to be most threatened by a changing climate.
If we don't act, Wyoming can expect temperatures during the warmest month to increase by 12 degrees Fahrenheit and water availability to decline by 37% by the end of the century, according to the AdaptWest Project. Climate change also intensifies existing threats for birds - and people - including the droughts, wildfires and insect outbreaks that are rapidly changing Wyoming's rangelands and forests.
It's not just a bird issue. Like canaries in coal mines, bird populations indicate the health of the natural resources that we all depend on. We are past the point of debating the issue; now is the time for swift action.
Here's the good news: Audubon's study shows that if we take action now, we can improve the chances for the majority of species at risk from climate change.
Wyoming is blessed with abundant grasslands that provide the foundation for our robust ranching industry. Healthy grasslands not only sustain our economy and culture, they also store large amounts of carbon and provide the quality habitat that birds will need to survive climate change.
One of the easiest things we can do to fight climate change is support ranches that are taking deliberate steps to protect and restore bird habitat. Audubon's Conservation Ranching Initiative certifies ranches that do exactly this.
In addition to productive ranches, our state is also rich in public lands that sustain hundreds of species of wildlife, including all of the species identified as most threatened by Audubon's report.
Of course, the energy development that occurs on these lands is also important to Wyoming's economy, but it's critical that we site it to minimize impacts to wildlife. Thoughtful management of these lands and responsible siting of renewable energy that takes into consideration the needs of birds are important strategies for helping birds in the face of climate change.
I also want to remind readers that you don't need to be a politician or land manager to help birds. Everyone with a yard, garden or balcony can do a little bit to create bird habitat and conserve resources.
Gardening with native plants - a rising movement - provides birds with more food and nesting sites than traditional gardening. Since native plants are adapted to their local environment, they also need less water, fertilizers and pesticides than nonnative plants.
By planting a native garden, you can join an effort to stitch together a landscape that can help birds in our communities be more resilient.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, our state will only conserve birds and nature if Wyomingites care about them and value the science that urges us to act. We already know what we need to do to address climate change, and we already have a lot of the tools and solutions we need to do that - what we need are more people who are committed to making sure those solutions are put into practice.
Climate change is a daunting issue, but trust me, it feels a lot less depressing when you take action to address it. To learn how you can help Audubon fight climate change in Wyoming through conservation ranching, responsible energy development, native gardening and environmental education, please visit .

Climate cha-nge's impact in Wyoming means increased numbers of wildfires, increased beetle outbreaks, prolonged droughts and longer heat waves. In the face of this dire reality, it's reassuring to know there are steps we can take to mitigate the damage.
While our first priority must be reducing the carbon emissions that are causing climate change as quickly as possible, we also need to recognize and act to reduce the devastating impacts that are happening now.
One of our best weapons in the fight against climate change is located far from Wyoming; it's the ocean. And this week, with World Oceans Day today, we all need to recognize that the more we do to protect our ocean, the better chance we have of defending against the impacts of climate change.
The ocean is the Earth's largest heat and carbon sink, capturing 30% of global carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere annually. Additionally, the ocean has absorbed more than 90% of the heat generated by industrial-era carbon dioxide emissions. There is simply no better tool to mitigate the impacts of climate change.
Yet, while it is our most effective buffer, the ocean is also at risk. According to the National Climate Assessment released late last year, U.S. ocean ecosystems are being disrupted by increasing global tem- peratures through the loss of iconic and highly valued habitats, changes in species composition and impacts on the food web structure.
Founded earlier this year, the Wyoming Inland Ocean Coalition hopes to inspire and empower Wyoming residents to promote the health of our ocean through education and community involvement, and demonstrate to our elected officials that we feel strongly about protecting our ocean. It's our mission to create a movement that builds land-to-sea stewardship while we galvanize the support for sustainable management, conservation and restoration of coastal and marine ecosystems that are critical in the fight against climate change.
To promote healthy ocean and coastal ecosystems that will help safeguard against the long-term impacts of climate change, our congressional representatives can and should prioritize ocean-related climate adaptation and mitigation measures now. They should support more funding for coastal and marine habitat restoration programs that conserve and restore wetlands and marine habitats that serve as a carbon sink and protect coastal communities during severe weather events. This should include support for the protection of the coral reefs that harbor the highest biodiversity of any ecosystems but are also among the most threatened.
They should uphold the law that requires the rebuilding and sustainable management of our wild caught fisheries. Overfishing can exacerbate the impacts of climate change, while healthy fisheries are more able to adapt. And, finally, they should maintain and expand marine protected areas - including marine sanctuaries and marine national monuments - that provide important benefits in the fight against climate change.
Now is the time for all our leaders to act on climate on behalf of Wyoming residents and all Americans. Though the ocean may be far from Wyoming, we can't afford to ignore it. Our elected officials must reach the same conclusion if we are to safeguard the ocean and all the benefits it provides us in the fight against climate change, regardless of where we live.
GENEVA (AP) - The head of the United Nations called Thursday for "immediate, rapid and large-scale" cuts in greenhouse gas emissions to curb global warming and avert climate disaster.
Ahead of the annual U.N. General Assembly meeting next week, Antonio Guterres warned governments that climate change is proceeding faster than predicted and fossil fuel emissions have already bounced back from a pandemic dip.
Speaking at the launch of a U.N.-backed report summarizing current efforts to tackle climate change, Guterres said recent extreme weather - from Hurricane Ida in the United States to floods in western Europe and the deadly heatwave in the Pacific Northwest - showed no country is safe from climate-related disasters.
"These changes are just the beginning of worse to come," he said, appealing to governments to meet the goals of the 2015 Paris climate accord.
"Unless there are immediate, rapid and large-scale reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, we will be unable to limit global heating to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 Fahrenheit)," said Guterres. "The consequences will be catastrophic."
In their report, titled United in Science 21, six U.N. bodies and scientific organizations drew on existing research to argue that there is a direct link between human-caused emissions, record high temperatures and disasters that have a tangible impact on individuals and societies, including "billions of work hours (...) lost through heat alone."
Because of the long-lasting effects of many emissions already released into the atmosphere, further impacts are inevitable, they noted.
"Even with ambitious action to slow greenhouse gas emissions, sea levels will continue to rise and threaten low-lying islands and coastal populations throughout the world," the authors wrote.
University of Michigan environment dean Jonathan Overpeck, who wasn't part of the report, said scientists have said this before but it's important: "The situation is getting bad, we know why and we know how to solve it in ways that leave us, and future generations, with a better, healthier, more sustainable world."
Guterres urged governments to put forward more ambitious plans for cutting emissions by the upcoming U.N. climate summit in Glasgow, including a commitment to stop adding more greenhouse gas to the atmosphere by mid-century than can be removed.
Michael Mann, a prominent climate scientist at Pennsylvania State University, said he agreed with the report's message of urgency but questioned some of the starker warnings it contained.
In particular, the 1.5C threshold agreed in Paris didn't apply to individual years, some of which can be unusually hot due to other factors, he said.
"This misleading framing unnecessarily feeds the fears that the public has that we've somehow already crossed that threshold and that it is too late now to prevent," said Mann. "We have not. And it is not."
He also noted that the drop in emissions seen during the pandemic could be viewed as a positive sign that significant cuts are possible if entire economies are weaned off fossil fuels.
The United States, Britain and the European Union have already made pledges that - if implemented - would help avert dangerous planetary warming, said Mann.
Kim Cobb, a professor of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Georgia Tech, was equally reassured that the 1.5C target isn't out of reach.
"However, this new report is a stark reminder of the difference between the emissions pathways required to achieve that target, and the reality on the ground," she said. "Simply put, we are way off course."
The deadly heat wave that roasted the Pacific Northwest and western Canada was virtually impossible without human-caused climate change that added a few extra degrees to the record-smashing temperatures, a new quick scientific analysis found.
An international team of 27 scientists calculated that climate change increased chances of the extreme heat occurring by at least 150 times, but likely much more.
The study, not yet peer reviewed, said that before the industrial era, the region's late June triple-digit heat was the type that would not have happened in human civilization. And even in today's warming world, it said, the heat was a once-in-a-millennium event.
But that once-in-a-millennium event would likely occur every five to 10 years once the world warms another 1.4 degrees (0.8 degrees Celsius), said Wednesday's study from World Weather Attribution. That much warming could be 40 or 50 years away if carbon pollution continues at its current pace, one study author said.
This type of extreme heat "would go from essentially virtually impossible to relatively commonplace," said study co-author Gabriel Vecchi, a Princeton University climate scientist. "That is a huge change."
The study also found that in the Pacific Northwest and Canada climate change was responsible for about 3.6 degrees (2 degrees Celsius) of the heat shock. Those few degrees make a big difference in human health, said study co-author Kristie Ebi, a professor at the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the University of Washington.
"This study is telling us climate change is killing people," said Ebi, who endured the blistering heat in Seattle. She said it will be many months before a death toll can be calculated from June's blast of heat but it's likely to be hundreds or thousands. "Heat is the No. 1 weather-related killer of Americans."
In Oregon alone, the state medical examiner on Wednesday reported 116 deaths related to the heat wave.
The team of scientists used a well-established and credible method to search for climate change's role in extreme weather, according to the National Academy of Sciences. They logged observations of what happened and fed them into 21 computer models and ran numerous simulations. They then simulated a world without greenhouse gases from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. The difference between the two scenarios is the climate change portion.
"Without climate change this event would not have happened," said study senior author Friederike Otto, a climate scientist at the University of Oxford.
What made the Northwest heat wave so remarkable is how much hotter it was than old records and what climate models had predicted. Scientists say this hints that some kind of larger climate shift could be in play - and in places that they didn't expect.
"Everybody is really worried about the implications of this event," said study co-author Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, a Dutch climate scientist. "This is something that nobody saw coming, that nobody thought possible. And we feel that we do not understand heat waves as well as we thought we did. The big question for many people is: Could this also happen in a lot of places?"
The World Weather Attribution team does these quick analyses, which later get published in peer-reviewed journals. In the past, they have found similar large climate change effects in many heat waves, including ones in Europe and Siberia. But sometimes the team finds climate change wasn't a factor, as they did in a Brazilian drought and a heat wave in India.
Six outside scientists said the quick study made sense and probably underestimated the extent of climate change's role in the heat wave.
That's because climate models used in the simulations usually underestimate how climate change alters the jet stream that parks "heat domes" over regions and causes some heat waves, said Pennsylvania State University climate scientist Michael Mann.
The models also underestimate how dry soil worsens heat because there is less water to evaporate, which feeds a vicious cycle of drought, said Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA and the Nature Conservancy.
The study hit home for University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver, who wasn't part of the research team.
"Victoria, which is known for its mild climate, felt more like Death Valley last week," Weaver said. "I've been in a lot of hot places in the world, and this was the worst I've ever been in.
"But you ain't seen nothing yet," he added. "It's going to get a lot worse."
AOC was holding a town hall meeting recently when a young lady, distraught about climate change, mentioned we only have months to live, that we need to cut down the Earth's population and said that we must start "eating the babies." But this was a staged political hoax, just like climate change.
Climate change is a staged political hoax. The Earth has been around for 4.5 billion years, has endured thousands of volcanic eruptions, forest fires, a myriad of different weather conditions, and the Earth is still here. Mankind has been on the planet for 20,000-plus-or-minus years, having little, if any, impact on our climate.
Since the early 1950s/60s, the political left has been issuing dire warnings of climate crisis, such as the Earth is going to freeze, or overheat, ice caps will melt, cities will be flooded, entire countries will be lost, millions will die, and the supposed ice age will drive people South to escape freezing temperatures. None of these predictions have occurred.
Mentioning Greta Thunberg and her "mass extinction," we are not on the verge of mass extinction or any extinction. Her childhood is ruined because the political left has lied to her and the rest of the students across the world, and she has chosen to believe those lies.
Additionally, Al Gore, et al., and the protesting students still drive cars, use electronic devices galore, eat meat, have AC, TV's, etc.; they have not changed their lifestyle in the slightest to reduce their so-called carbon footprint. Thus, the climate crisis is a staged political hoax.
It is interesting that the political leftists (AOC, Gore, etc.) who have these grand ideas of how the rest of us should live are not stepping up to the plate to be leaders by eliminating themselves in an attempt to "save the planet," but rather the rest of us should die so that they can live.



Page 17 of 17Climate change is just a staged political hoax


 


 

